Journal of Personality and Social Psychology
1996, Vol. 71, No. 2, 390-405

Copyright 1996 by the American Psychological Association, Inc.
0022-3514/96/S3.00

Individual Differences in Intuitive-Experiential
and Analytical-Rational Thinking Styles
Seymour Epstein and Rosemary Pacini

Veronika Denes-Raj
Pace University

University of Massachusetts at Amherst

Harriet Heier
University of Massachusetts at Amherst
Two studies provide evidence for the reliability and validity of a new self-report measure of individual
differences in intuitive-experiential and analytical-rational thinking based on cognitive-experiential self-theory (CEST). The Rational-Experiential Inventory (REI) was constructed to measure
the 2 independent processing modes with a modified Need for Cognition Scale (NFC, J. T. Cacioppo
& R. E. Petty, 1982) and a new scale, Faith in Intuition (FI). In Study 1, a factor analysis yielded 2
orthogonal factors corresponding to NFC and FI. Although heuristic processing was determined
primarily by FI, NFC also contributed to heuristic responding, in line with CEST. The relation of FI
and NFC to coping ability also was examined. In Study 2, the factor structure of the REI was replicated (A' = 973). NFC and FI were differentially related to measures of personality, adjustment,
achievement, and interpersonal relations.

Psychologists from various persuasions have proposed two
fundamentally different modes of processing information: one
that has been variously referred to as intuitive (Jung, 1964/
1968), natural (Tversky & Kahneman, 1983), automatic
(Bargh, 1989; Higgins, 1989),/!e«rz.tfzc(Chaiken, 1980; Fiske
& Taylor, 1991; Tversky & Kahneman, 1983), schematic
(Leventhal, 1984), prototypical (Rosch, 1983), narrative
(Bruner, 1986), implicit (Weinberger & McClelland, 1991),
imagistic-nonverbal (Bucci, 1985; Paivio, 1986), experiential
(Epstein, 1983), mythos (Labouvie-Vief, 1990), and first-signal system (Pavlov, cited in Luria, 1961) and the other as thinking-conceptual-logical (Buck, 1985; Leventhal, 1984; Jung,
1964/1968), analytical-rational (Epstein, 1983), deliberative-effortful-intentional-systematic (Bargh, 1989; Chaiken,
1980; Higgins, 1989), explicit (Weinberger & McClelland,
1991), extensional (Tversky & Kahneman, 1983), verbal
(Bucci, 1985; Paivio, 1986), logos (Labouvie-Vief, 1990), and
second-signal system (Pavlov, cited in Luria, 1961).
Although considerable research and theorizing have been devoted to explaining the nature of these processes (see references

Seymour Epstein, Rosemary Pacini, and Harriet Heier, Department
of Psychology, University of Massachusetts at Amherst; Veronika
Denes-Raj, Pace University Education Outreach Program.
Preparation of this article and the research reported in it were supported by National Institute of Mental Health (NIMH) Research Grant
MH 01293 and NIMH Research Scientist Award 5 K05 MH00363 to
Seymour Epstein. We wish to express our appreciation to Alice H. Epstein for her constructive criticism of a previous version and to Ronald
Hambleton for his consultation on statistical issues.
Correspondence concerning this article should be addressed to Seymour Epstein, Department of Psychology, University of Massachusetts,
Amherst, Massachusetts 01003. Electronic mail may be sent via the Internet to sepstein@psych.umass.edu.
390

above), relatively little effort has been expended on measuring
individual differences in the degree to which people characteristically operate in one mode or the other. The few notable exceptions (e.g., Briggs & Myers, 1976; Cacioppo & Petty, 1982)
have serious limitations with respect to measuring the two
modes of processing. Assuming that two information processing modes exist, it would be of interest to demonstrate reliable
individual differences in their relative usage and to have an instrument for effectively measuring those differences. For clinical
and personality psychologists, individual differences in the degree to which people rely on one mode of thinking or the other
could be helpful in diagnosing and understanding various psychopathologies. Jung (1964/1968) believed this was the case
when he proposed that thinking and intuition are among the
two most basic ways of interpreting information. Although Jung
provided no way of measuring these functions, Briggs and Myers (1976), influenced by his theory, developed a self-report instrument for measuring related dimensions.
For social psychologists, a measure of the relative degree to
which people rely on the two processes could be helpful in understanding receptivity to different kinds of communication.
For example, appeals to emotions, personal experience, and the
use of concrete examples could be more effective for individuals
who process information primarily in an intuitive mode,
whereas presenting facts and logical arguments could be more
effective for individuals who process information primarily in
an analytical mode. Some evidence suggests that this may be
the case. Cacioppo, Petty, and their associates, among others
(Axsom, Yates, & Chaiken, 1987; Cacioppo & Petty, 1982; Cacioppo, Petty, & Morris, 1983; Petty, Schumann, Richman, &
Strathman, 1993), have shown that scores on the Need for Cognition scale (NFC; Cacioppo & Petty, 1982) are related to heuristic processing associated with impression formation and to
people's receptivity to different kinds of information. It would

INDIVIDUAL DIFFERENCES IN THINKING STYLE

be informative to determine whether a measure of intuitive processing would be independent of, and supplement, the NFC
scale.
COGNITIVE-EXPERIENTIAL SELF-THEORY

391

which is directly associated with degree of experiential dominance, and repeated amounts of relevant experience, or "proceduralization" (Anderson, 1982), which also favors experiential processing. With its long evolutionary history, experiential
processing is often adaptive, but it is ill-suited for solving problems that require logical analysis and an understanding of abstract relations.

The research presented in this article was guided by a global
theory of personality referred to as cognitive-experiential selftheory (CEST; Epstein, 1990, 1991, 1993, 1994). CEST proBASIC AIMS
poses that people process information by two parallel, interactive systems: a rational system and an experiential system. AcThree aims guided the research reported in this article. The
cording to CEST, the rational system operates primarily at the
broadest aim was to obtain information relevant to the conconscious level and is intentional, analytic, primarily verbal,
struct validity of CEST. A more specific aim was to develop a
and relatively affect free. The experiential system is assumed to
reliable self-report measure of individual differences in intube automatic, preconscious, holistic, associationistic, primarily
itive-experiential and analytical-rational thinking styles. A
nonverbal, and intimately associated with affect. Heuristic prothird aim was to examine the correlates of the two self-reported
cessing represents the natural mode of the experiential system
thinking styles, including a propensity toward heuristic process(Epstein, Lipson, Holstein, & Huh, 1992). Further details on
ing, coping ability, adjustment, and gender differences.
the comparative properties of the two systems are outlined in
Table 1.
THE CONSTRUCT VALIDATION OF CEST
Behavior and conscious thought are a joint function of the
two systems. The systems normally engage in seamless, inteAccording to CEST, there are important individual differgrated interaction, but they sometimes conflict, experienced as
ences in the degree to which people rely on the experiential and
a struggle between feelings and thoughts (e.g., Denes-Raj & Eprational modes of information processing. We examine this in
stein, 1994). The degree of relative dominance of either system
the present article by determining whether reliable self-report
in particular situations is determined by various parameters,
scales of experiential and rational processing can be conincluding individual differences in preference for relying on one
structed, by determining whether heuristic responses to a broad
system more than the other, the degree to which the situation is
range of specially constructed vignettes reveal reliable individassociated with a customary way of responding (e.g., matheual differences, and by establishing whether the two measures of
matics problems are primarily responded to in the mode of the
individual differences are reliably related.
rational system and interpersonal problems in the mode of the
CEST views heuristic processing as the operation of an orgaexperiential system), the degree of emotional involvement,
nized, adaptive system—the experiential system, which is inde-

Table 1
Comparison ofthe Experiential and Rational Systems
Experiential system

Rational system

1. Holistic
2. Automatic, effortless
3. Affective: Pleasure-pain oriented (what feels good)
4. Associationistic connections
5. Behavior mediated by "vibes" from past events

1. Analytic
2. Intentional, effortful
3. Logical: Reason oriented (what is rational)
4. Logical connections
5. Behavioral mediated by conscious
appraisal of events
6. Encodes reality in abstract symbols,
words, and numbers
7. Slower processing: oriented toward
delayed action
8. Changes more rapidly and easily: changes
with strength of argument and new
evidence
9. More highly differentiated

6. Encodes reality in concrete images, metaphors,
and narratives
7. More rapid processing: oriented toward
immediate action
8. Slower and more resistant to change: Change with
repetitive or intense experience
9. More crudely differentiated: Broad generalization
gradient; stereotypical thinking
10. More crudely integrated: Dissociative, emotional
complexes; context-specific processing
11. Experienced passively and preconsciously: we are
seized by our emotions
12. Self-evidently valid: "Experiencing is believing"

10. More highly integrated: Context-general
principles
11. Experienced actively and consciously: We
are in control of our thoughts
12. Requires justification via logic and
evidence

Note. From "Cognitive-Experiential Self-Theory: An Integrative Theory of Personality" by S. Epstein,
1991, in R. C. Curtis, Editor, The Relational Self: Theoretical Convergences in Psychoanalysis and Social
Psychology, New York: Guilford Press. Copyright 1991 by Guilford Press. Adapted by permission.

392

EPSTEIN, PACINI, DENES-RAJ, AND HEIER

pendent from the rational system. This is in contrast to the prevailing view of heuristic processing as consisting of independent
cognitive shortcuts. The views of Tversky and Kahneman are
inconsistent in this respect. In a discussion of the surprising
prevalence of conjunction errors in responses to the notorious
Linda vignette, Tversky and Kahneman (1983) concluded that
there is a "natural" mode of processing that operates by different rules from a rational, or "extensional," mode. In other
contexts they discuss heuristic processing as separate strategies
(e.g., anchoring, availability, representative, simulation) employed within a single processing system that includes rational
thinking. As a result, their theory has been referred to as a "tool
box theory" because they view heuristics as convenient cognitive shortcuts "selected from a mental toolbox of reasoning procedures" (Pennington, 1990, p. 32). An issue of considerable
theoretical importance is whether heuristic processing consists
of a series of independent shortcut strategies or represents the
operation of an organized, adaptive system. The present study
can contribute to the resolution of this issue because, to the
extent that there are two organized, adaptive independent yet
interacting systems, people can be expected to differ in the degree to which they rely on each. Thus, evidence for reliable,
broad individual differences across stimuli would provide support for the existence of the integrated systems postulated by
CEST.

Constructing a Measure of Individual Differences in
Thinking Style: One Bipolar or
Two Unipolar Dimensions?
A critical issue in developing a measure of experiential and
rational thinking styles is whether the items should be constructed to be bimodal (e.g., "I am more of a 'thinking-type'
person than a 'feeling-type' person") or unimodal (e.g., "I believe in trusting my hunches" and "I enjoy intellectually challenging problems"). Although CEST assumes that there are
two modes, it makes no assumption regarding whether they operate in reciprocal relation to each other or orthogonally. This
issue remains to be resolved empirically by constructing independent scales and determining whether they are inversely related or independent.
A search through the literature revealed two self-report measures, the Myers-Briggs Type Indicator (MBTI; Briggs & Myers,
1976) and the NFC scale (Cacioppo & Petty, 1982), that
seemed relevant to our conceptualization of individual differences in rational and experiential processing. The MBTI, influenced by Jungian theory, provides scores, among others, on
two relevant dimensions—thinking versus feeling and sensing
versus intuiting—that are bipolar and therefore not useful for
resolving the issue of unipolarity versus bipolarity. Cacioppo
and Petty's NFC scale contains items that focus on engagement
in and enjoyment of intellectual activities. As such, the scale is
relevant to rational processing but provides no information on
experiential processing.
Therefore, in constructing the Rational-Experiential Inventory (REI), we decided to include two unipolar dimensions that
would correspond to rational and experiential processing, as
proposed by CEST. To measure analytic-rational processing,
we adopted the NFC scale, a reliable, valid measure (Cacioppo

& Petty, 1982). Because no available inventory covered the intuitive-experiential dimension envisioned by CEST, we constructed our own measure. We generated a pool of items to measure engagement and confidence in one's intuitive abilities. The
development of a coherent, workable scale to measure intuitiveexperiential processing took place informally over several years
(see Epstein et al., 1992), and so it is difficult to outline the
process of this scale's development precisely, because it went
through many changes, spurred on by conceptual refinements,
wording choices, and psychometric feedback. The result of this
effort was the creation of a usable scale with face validity and
adequate reliability (see Block & Kremen, 1996; and Eysenck
& Eysenck, 1976, for similar descriptions of scale development). We named the intuitive-experiential scale Faith in Intuition (¥1).
If there are in fact two unipolar dimensions rather than a single bipolar dimension, then it follows that they should not only
establish unique patterns of relations with other variables
(ratherthan the equivalent opposites), but they should also supplement each other, because, according to CEST, behavior is a
joint function of both modes of processing. In summary, a major concern of the study was to establish whether the experiential and rational modes are best measured by two unipolar
scales or one bipolar scale. In the latter event, the next step
would be to determine whether single bipolar items would be a
better way to measure the bipolar dimension than to measure
each of the poles separately.
Empirical Correlates of the Two Modes
of Thinking Style
According to CEST, the rational and experiential modes represent two fundamental ways in which people process information and thereby adapt to the environment. As such, they carry
implications for a wide variety of behaviors, such as coping ability, adjustment, gender differences, achievement, and interpersonal relations. Relations of the REI scores to measures of such
behaviors are explored empirically in the present article.
OVERVIEW
In this article we present two studies that evaluate the construct validity of CEST by examining individual differences in
analytical-rational and intuitive-experiential processing. In the
first study we present a preliminary version of the REI and examine the relationship of the two self-reported processing dimensions to coping ability, to a non-self-report measure of heuristic processing, and to gender. In the second study we present
a factor analysis of a subset of the REI items with a large student
sample and examine the relationships of the two self-reported
processing dimensions to gender, adjustment, and interpersonal
relations in order to further establish the construct and discriminant validity of the REI scales.
Study 1
In a preliminary attempt to develop an individual-differences
measure of the two processing modes, we adopted items from
an already established scale, the NFC scale (Cacioppo & Petty,

393

INDIVIDUAL DIFFERENCES IN THINKING STYLE

1982), and created the FI scale. As already noted, we were particularly interested in whether responses to the two scales were
inversely related or independent and in examining the relation
of the REI scales to gender, coping ability, and heuristic responding to vignettes.
Heuristic responses to vignettes provide an alternate index of
individual differences in rational and experiential processing.
In contrast to the self-report scales, the vignettes are non-selfreport measures from which responses may be objectively
scored as heuristic or rational. The vignettes, adapted from a
variety of studies of judgmental heuristics (e.g., Kahneman &
Miller, 1986; Kahneman & Tversky, 1982; Morgan, Larrick, &
Nisbett, 1990), depict situations that require judgments about
either the relative degree of distress following arbitrary outcomes or about cost-benefit effects. For example, one vignette
describes a situation in which usual versus unusual behaviors
are associated with the same outcome: A man, taking the usual
route home after considering the scenic route, gets into a car
accident. Another man, who took the scenic route instead, also
was involved in an accident. Respondents are asked to judge
which man would feel more foolish or upset. As the outcome in
either situation is objectively the same, a response from a rational perspective (i.e., how a completely logical person would
react) would be that there was no difference between the two
men in level of distress. From a heuristic perspective (i.e., how
most people actually behave), the most common response
would be that the man who took the "unusual" scenic route
would be more upset than the man who took the usual route,
because in changing his behavior, he was more responsible for
the mishap.
On the basis of CEST we predicted that heuristic responses
are directly related to intuitive-experiential processing, as heuristic processing represents the natural mode of the experiential
system. Analytic-rational processing, in contrast, was predicted to be negatively associated with heuristic responding. As
the two modes are assumed to independently contribute to behavior, scores on the two scales of the REI were expected to
supplement each other in predicting heuristic responses to
vignettes.
In addition to responding to the vignettes from the perspective of the protagonist, which they were told to assume is how
the average person would respond, participants responded from
two additional perspectives: how they, themselves, would respond (self perspective) and how a completely logical person
(logical perspective) would respond. This procedure has been
used successfully in previous research to demonstrate the
different operating principles of the rational and experiential
systems (Epstein, 1994; Epstein et al., 1992; Kirkpatrick & Epstein, 1992). The purpose of eliciting responses to the vignettes
from three perspectives was twofold. First, reporting how other
people behave facilitates heuristic processing as it reduces the
need to present oneself as rational (Kirkpatrick & Epstein,
1992). Logical-perspective responses permit participants to
show that they know the rational response but recognize that it
is not the way most people normally behave. Second, we wished
to demonstrate that people are intuitively aware of two modes
of processing information: one that describes how people, including themselves, normally respond in everyday life (the experiential mode) and another that describes a logical manner of

responding (the rational mode). If participants are aware of
these two modes of processing information, they can alter their
responses appropriately when asked to make judgments from
the different perspectives. Although this may appear self-evident, its occurrence would support the two modes proposed by
CEST; that is, one reason that people would believe in the two
modes is that they actually exist.
Responses from a logical perspective are of particular interest, as they provide an objective index of the ability to distinguish between heuristic and logical thinking. That is, to the extent that people produce heuristic responses when attempting
to adopt a logical perspective, it suggests that they are unable to
determine that their heuristic responses are not logical. Previous research (Epstein et al., 1992) has indicated that such a
failure in discrimination is common and that people tend to
rationalize their heuristic responses as rationally determined.
We were interested in whether such behavior is associated with
responses to the two self-report modes of thinking style and,
more specifically, in whether it is more closely associated with
experiential processing than with rational processing, as measured by the REI.
Testing the assumption in CEST that there is a highly general
experiential processing system is complicated by another assumption: The experiential system operates in a contextspecific manner. Although its basic operating principles are assumed to be the same in all situations, responses to particular
situations should vary according to the experiences individuals
have had in them. To the extent that the experiential system
operates in a context-specific manner, the generality of responses across different kinds of situations should be reduced.
In contrast, responses influenced by the rational system, which
operates according to context-free, abstract principles, should
be more cross-situationally consistent, or general. Thus, we expected that heuristic responses from the self and protagonist
perspectives, both of which tend to elicit experiential processing, should show less generality across stimuli than responses
from the logical perspective, which demands rational
processing.

Method
Sample and Procedure
One hundred eighty-four participants (55 men and 129 women), enrolled in undergraduate psychology classes at a large state university,
volunteered for the study in exchange for experimental credit. They
received a set of vignettes and inventories that they completed at home.
They were instructed to complete the vignettes before the questionnaires. All materials were returned at the next class meeting or to a
secretary.

Materials
REI. The REI is a 31-item inventory assembled for the purpose
of constructing a preliminary test of analytic-rational and intuitiveexperiential thinking (see Table 2). The REI consists of two unipolar
scales: One measures rational thinking and is constructed from a pool
of items from the original NFC scale (Cacioppo & Petty, 1982), and the
other measures experiential thinking. Because of time constraints, 19
items from the original 45-item NFC scale were selected on the basis of
variations in content and item-total correlations. The short NFC scale,

394

EPSTEIN, PACINI, DENES-RAJ, AND HEIER

like the original, describes the extent to which individuals report that
they enjoy and engage in, or dislike and avoid, cognitive activities. The
FI scale includes 12 items, most of which refer to having confidence in
one's feelings and immediate impressions as a basis for decisions and
actions. All of the items on the FI scale are positively worded. In preliminary research, we attempted to word half the items in a negative direction, but this produced unsatisfactory internal consistency reliabilities.
The reason for this may be that negatively wording the items introduced
a pejorative element. To assert that one's initial impressions of people
are almost always right is not the opposite equivalent of acknowledging
that they are almost always wrong. The former is a better measure of
individual differences because it elicits greater variability in endorse-

ments. Respondents rated all items on a 5-point scale ranging from completelyfalse to completely true.
Constructive Thinking Inventory (CTIj. The CTI (Epstein, 1990,
1992a, 1992b; Epstein & Meier, 1989) is a 108-item self-report measure
of individual differences in automatic constructive and destructive
thoughts and interpretations of events that occur in everyday life. It provides a Global scale of constructive thinking, and the following additional scales and subscales, or facets: Emotional Coping and its facets of
Self-Acceptance, Absence of Negative Overgeneralization, Nonsensitivity, and Absence of Dwelling on Unfavorable Events; Behavioral Coping
and its facets of Action Orientation, Positive Thinking, and Conscientiousness; Personal Superstitious Thinking; Categorical Thinking and

Table 2
Factor Loadings ofthe Rational-Experiential Inventory Scales
Factor
Scale and item
Need for cognition
I would rather do something that requires little thought than something that is sure
to challenge my thinking abilities. (R)
I don't like to have the responsibility of handling a situation that requires a lot of
thinking. (R)
I would prefer complex to simple problems.
I try to anticipate and avoid situations where there is a likely chance I will have to
think in depth about something. (R)
Ifindlittle satisfaction in deliberating hard and for long hours. (R)
Thinking is not my idea of fun. (R)
The notion of thinking abstractly is not appealing to me. (R)
I prefer my life to befilledwith puzzles that I must solve.
Simply knowing the answer rather than understanding the reasons for the answer to
a problem isfinewith me. (R)
I don't reason well under pressure. (R)
The idea of relying on thought to make my way to the top does not appeal to me.
(R)
I prefer to talk about international problems rather than to gossip or talk about
celebrities.
Learning new ways to think doesn't excite me very much. (R)
I would prefer a task that is intellectual, difficult, and important to one that is
somewhat important but does not require much thought.
I generally prefer to accept things as they are rather than to question them. (R)
It is enough for me that something gets the job done, I don't care how or why it
works. (R)
I tend to set goals that can be accomplished only by expending considerable mental
effort.
I have difficulty thinking in new and unfamiliar situations. (R)
I feel relief rather than satisfaction after completing a task that required a lot of
mental effort. (R)
Faith in Intuition
My initial impressions of people are almost always right.
I trust my initial feelings about people.
When it comes to trusting people, I can usually rely on my "gut feelings."
I believe in trusting my hunches.
I can usually feel when a person isrightor wrong even if I can't explain how I know.
I am a very intuitive person.
I can typically senserightaway when a person is lying.
I am quick to form impressions about people.
I believe I can judge character pretty well from a person's appearance.
I often have clear visual images of things.
I have a very good sense of rhythm.
I am good at visualizing things.
Eigenvalue

.74

-.08

.71

-.05
-.02

-.66

-.06
-.04

.65
.63
.59
.58

-.02

-.57

.01

.57
.55

-.10

.51

.12

-.49
.49

-.13
-.18

.49
.46

-.00

.44

.20

-.42
.36

-.18
-.32

.36

-.00

.02
.21
.18
.18
.10

-.09
-.07
-.19

.76
.76
.72
.64
.56
.53
.46
.42
.40
.35
.34
.34

6.15

3.84

-.16
-.12
.20
.22

.11

.16

.04

Note. N = 184. Values in boldface type indicate the highest factor loading for each item. (R) = reverse
scored.

INDIVIDUAL DIFFERENCES IN THINKING STYLE
its facets of Polarized Thinking, Distrust of Others, and Intolerance;
Esoteric Thinking and its facets of Belief in the Unusual and Formal
Superstitious Thinking; and Naive Optimism and its facets of Overpositivity, Stereotypical Thinking and Pollyanna-ish Thinking.
The CTI has well-documented evidence of construct validity and reliability. The internal consistency reliability coefficients of its major
scales are in the high .80s and low .90s (Epstein, 1990). CTI scores have
been shown to be significantly associated with a variety of measures of
success in living, including success in the workplace and social relationships, and mental and physical well-being (e.g., Epstein, 1992a, 1992b;
Epstein &Brodsky, 1993; Epstein &Katz, 1992; Epstein & Meier, 1989;
Katz & Epstein, 1991).
Vignettes. The vignette measure (see Appendix) consisted of eight
vignettes depicting situations that require judgments about relative degree of distress following arbitrary outcomes after near versus far misses
(2 vignettes), usual versus unusual behaviors (3 vignettes), and acts of
commission versus omission (3 vignettes). Three other vignettes required judgments about cost-benefit effects. The vignettes presented
alternative versions of events that have the same outcome.
The instructions called for participants to respond to each of the vignettes by indicating in which version, if either, they believed the protagonist would feel more upset or foolish, or behave in a more irrational
way. After making their responses from the perspective of the protagonist, whom they were told to regard as "the average person," participants
were instructed to make similar ratings from the perspective of how
they, themselves (self perspective), would react if they were in the position of the protagonist, and how a "completely logical person" (logical
perspective) would react.
Nonrational responses to the situations described in the vignettes
constituted heuristic responses. For example, in one of the near- versus
far-misses vignettes, reporting that one would feel more foolish for missing a plane by 5 min (near miss) than missing it by 30 min (far miss)
when the near miss was caused by an unexpected delay in the departure
of the aircraft was scored as a heuristic response. An example of a heuristic response to a cost-benefit vignette is reporting that one would eat
more of an unappetizing, expensive pastry than of a cheaper one. We
computed three heuristic response scores, corresponding to the three
perspectives (protagonist, self, and logical), by summing the number of
nonrational responses from each perspective across the 11 vignettes.

Results and Discussion
Self-Reported Rational-Experiential Processing
It will be recalled that the REI consists of two scales, NFC
and FI, which measure rational and experiential processing, respectively (see Table 2). Because of time limitations, we administered a specially constructed shortened version of Cacioppo
and Petty's (1982) NFC scale. Items for the FI scale were constructed on a face-valid basis, and those that reduced internal
consistency reliabilities were eliminated. The final version of
the modified NFC scale consisted of 19 items and was reasonably reliable (a = .87). The final version of the new FI scale
consisted of 12 items and had moderate reliability (a = .77).
The average interitem correlations were .26 and .23 for the NFC
and FI scales, respectively.
The 31 items of the REI 'were entered into a principal-components factor analysis with varimax rotation (see Table 2). A
scree test indicated that little added variance was explained beyond a two-factor solution, which accounted for 32.2% of the
total variance. Thefirstrotated factor (19.8%) contained all the
items from the new NFC scale, and the second factor (12.4%)
corresponded to the FI scale. All items loaded above. 30 on their

395

respective factors. Only one item from the NFC scale ("I have
difficulty thinking in new and unfamiliar situations") seemed
to discriminate poorly between the two factors. However, because its loading was higher on the NFC factor than on the FI
factor, and because its removal would have lowered the NFC
reliability, it was retained. Items were summed, and scale means
and standard deviations were computed (NFC: M = 64.29, SD
= 10.54; FI: M = 41.13, SD = 6.08). The NFC and FI scales
are not significantly related to each other (r = —.07), which
provides evidence that rational and experiential processing are
independent. Thus, the results of both the reliability and factor
analyses suggest that NFC and FI are reliable, independent
constructs.
Gender comparisons of REI scores showed that men (M =
67.02) scored higher on the NFC scale than women (M =
63.14), t{ 182) = 2.31, p < .05. However, as shown in Study 2
(of this article), this gender difference was not replicated with a
much larger sample. There was no significant gender difference
in FI scores. FI and NFC were not significantly intercorrelated
for either men or women. Because of gender differences in NFC
scores in Study 1, subsequent analyses that included the entire
sample controlled for gender effects, and separate analyses were
conducted for men and women.

Relation ofRational and Experiential Processing to
Measures of Coping and Adjustment
To examine the relation of experiential and rational processing to coping ability, we computed correlations between REI
and CTI scores, which are presented by gender and total sample
(see Table 3). We corrected all correlations for attenuation using reliability information from both the CTI and REI. These
correlations provide evidence for the convergent and discriminant validity of the REI scales. That the correlations of coping
measures with NFC scores are generally stronger than those
with FI scores suggests that rational processing may be more
critical for effective coping (one can't afford to be irrational),
whereas one can cope effectively across a wide range of intuitive
processing. People with high NFC scores tend to be generally
good constructive thinkers, to avoid negative overgeneralization, to take effective action to solve problems, and to avoid
being unrealistically optimistic. People with high FI scores, on
the other hand, report being more naive and holding more unrealistic beliefs than others. They also report conventionally
proper, stereotyped views, such as that everyone should love
their mothers.
Some interesting, unpredicted relationships moderated by
gender also emerged. NFC was significantly related to Global
Constructive Thinking, Emotional Coping and its facets of Absence of Negative Overgeneralization and Nonsensitivity, and to
the Behavioral Copying facet of Positive Thinking in men, but
not in women (all Zs > 2.04). This suggests that NFC in men
is more important for determining general coping ability than
in women. In women, Distrust is more strongly related to both
NFC and FI than in men (Zs = 2.16 and 2.09, p < .05,
respectively) and indicates that women who report high confidence in their rationality and low confidence in their intuitions
tend to be less trusting of others. For women, having a thinking
style that runs counter to the one stereotypically associated with

396

EPSTEIN, PACINI, DENES-RAJ, AND HEIER

Table 3
Correlations ofScores From the Constructive Thinking Inventory (CTI) and the Rational-Experiential Inventory
Need for Cognition

Faith in Intuition

CTI scale3

Men

Women

Total

Men

Women

Total

Global Constructive Thinking (.89)
Emotional Coping (.91)
Self Acceptance (.80)
Absence of Negative Overgeneralization (.71)
Non-Sensitivity (.81)
Absence of Dwelling (.82)
Behavioral Coping (.83)
Positive Thinking (.76)
Action Orientation (.74)
Conscientiousness (.64)
Personal Superstitious Thinking (.78)
Categorical Thinking (.78)
Polarized Thinking (.69)
Distrust (.76)
Intolerance (.69)
Esoteric Thinking (.88)
Belief in the Unusual (.85)
Formal Superstition (.74)
Naive Optimism (.75)
Over Optimism (.75)
Stereotypical Thinking (.49)
Pollyanna-ish Thinking (.58)

.42**
.36*
.00
.46**
.44**
.27
.49***
.44**
.49**
.40*
-.20
-.18
-.19
-.09
-.20
-.11
.03
-.27
-.43**
-.44**
-.10
-.45*

.07
.00
-.08
.16
.05
-.06
.27***
.00
.38***
.18
-.02
.17
-.09
.26*
.13
-.02
.00
-.06
_ 37 *»*
-.25*
-.37**
-.27*

.17*
.09
-.06
.26**
.15
.03
.34***
.13
.41***
.25**
-.08
.06
-.13
.16
.04
-.06
.01
-.13
-.37***
-.32***
-.28*
-.32**

.17
.08
.22
-.20
.01
.23
.17
.25
.12
.22
.10
.01
.09
.09
-.25
.35*
.41*
.25
.18
-.11
.45*
.28

.02
-.11
-.04
-.03
-.15
-.14
.16
.20
.05
.33*
.01
-.01
.21
-.25*
.00
.28**
.27*
.28*
.22
.01
.17
.34**

.07
-.05
.02
-.08
-.10
-.04
.16
.21*
.06
.28**
.04
-.01
.18
-.16
-.07
.30***
.31***
.27**
.20*
-.03
.26*
.31*

Note. Men, n = 55; women, n = 129. Gender is partialed out of total sample correlations. Boldface type indicates a significant gender difference.
Correlations are maximally corrected for attenuation. Significance levels refer to uncorrected correlations.
a
CTI reliabilities are in parentheses.
* p < . 0 5 . **/?<.01. ***/><.001.

femininity (low rationality, strong intuition) may translate into
difficulties in interpersonal relations. Other correlations between thinking style and coping suggest different patterns for
men and women. For example, conscientious men tended to be
high in NFC, whereas conscientious women tended to be high in
FI. Stereotypical thinking tended to be less likely among women
high in NFC, whereas it was more likely in men with high FI
scores. For both genders, correlations between NFC and Behavioral Coping and its facet of Action Orientation and naive Optimism and its three facets suggest that for both genders, rationality is associated with constructive behavioral coping and inversely related to thinking in more primitive, naive ways.
In sum, the unipolar scales are clearly not opposite equivalents of each other. As expected, rational processing is associated with constructive, action-oriented coping, whereas experiential processing is associated with affectively positive, although
naive and unrealistic, thinking patterns.
To test for the joint contribution of the REI scores in predicting coping ability, we conducted regressions using CTI scores
as dependent variables. The predictors, in order of entry, were:
gender (a control variable), NFC and FI, and the interaction of
NFC and FI. In general, the regression analyses confirmed what
is shown in Table 3: NFC and FI have different coping correlates. However, in predicting two facets of Behavioral Coping,
NFC and FI had significant additive and interaction effects.
Similar patterns emerged for the two facets: Action Orientation,
R = .36, F(4, 179) = 6.65,p <.001, and Conscientiousness, R
= .38, F(4, 179) = 7.38, p < .001, in which NFC, FI, and the
interaction term were all significant predictors. For both facets,

the most unique variance was contributed by NFC (3%-6%),
followed by FI (2%-6%) and the interaction term (2%-4%).
Furthermore, NFC, FI, and the interaction term were all significant predictors of Action Orientation in men, R = .48, F( 3,
51) = 4.97, p < .01, but not in women.
Generality of Heuristic Responses Across Vignettes
From Three Perspectives
We conducted an internal consistency reliability (a) analysis
of heuristic responses to the 11 vignettes from each of the three
perspectives. The average interitem correlations for the protagonist, self, and logical perspectives were, respectively, .08, .07,
and .32. The corresponding reliability coefficients were .50, .46,
and .84. The logical-perspective average interitem correlation
was significantly greater than the average interitem correlations
for the self and protagonist perspectives (Zs > 3.50, p < .001),
which did not differ significantly from each other. These coefficients indicate that generality of heuristic responding across
vignettes is exhibited in all three perspectives, but the degree of
generality is significantly greater for responses from a rational
(how a logical person would behave) than from an experiential
(how the average person or self behaves in real life) perspective.
Do people who respond more heuristically than others from
one perspective do the same from the other perspectives? To answer this question, we computed correlations across the different perspectives. The correlation between the self and protagonist perspectives was substantial, r(184) = .72, whereas the correlations of the self and protagonist perspectives with the logical

397

INDIVIDUAL DIFFERENCES IN THINKING STYLE

perspective were low, albeit statistically significant (rs = .25 and
.16, respectively). The correlation of .72 is surprising considering that the internal reliability coefficients of the two measures
are both lower. The explanation is that responses from a self
and protagonist perspective are not independent, as participants
regard their heuristic behavior as similar to that of others. Accordingly, although their responses vary as a function of the
different vignettes, the variation is synchronous between the
two perspectives. In other words, there is greater variation
among vignettes than there is between perspectives, accounting
for the internal consistency coefficients being lower than the correlation between the self and protagonist perspectives. That the
correlation between the self and the logical perspective is somewhat higher (r = .25) than the correlation between the protagonist and the logical perspectives (r = .16) suggests, consistent
with other findings (Kirkpatrick & Epstein, 1992), that people
tend to view themselves as more logical than others. The significant correlations across modes of responding provide evidence of a broad individual-differences variable of the tendency
to produce heuristic responses.
Degree of Heuristic Responding to Vignettes From
Three Perspectives
As expected, participants were able to vary their responses to
the vignettes to correspond to the perspectives they were asked
to adopt. The results from a within-subjects multivariate analysis of variance (MANOVA) showed that they made the greatest
number of heuristic responses from the protagonist (M - 8.33)
and the self (M = 7.96) perspectives, and the fewest from the
logical perspective (M= 4.66), F(2, 366) = 179.40, p< .001.
There were no significant gender differences in heuristic responding from the protagonist and self perspectives. From the
logical perspective, however, women (M = 5.00) made more
heuristic responses than men did (M = 3.87), t{ 182) = 2.15, p
<.05.
In summary, these results indicate that people are able to vary
their responses according to the perspective they are asked to
adopt, in line with the prediction from CEST that people are
aware of two modes of processing. Also in line with the theory
is thefindingthat responses from the rational (logical) perspective are more general than those from the two predominantly
experiential perspectives (protagonist, self), which is consistent
with the assumption that the rational system operates by abstract, general principles, whereas experiential processing is
more context specific.
Relation of Heuristic Responding to Vignettes and SelfReport Scores on theREI
Separate effects ofNFC and FI. Table 4 presents the correlations between the number of heuristic responses across the
11 vignettes and scores on the REI scales. Because of the low
reliabilities of the heuristic responses from self and protagonist
perspectives, correlations were corrected for attenuation. The
correlations for men did not differ significantly from those for
women. In contrast to the significant correlations produced by
heuristic responses to vignettes from a self perspective, none
from a protagonist perspective are significant. This makes sense

Table 4
Correlations ofScores on the Rational-Experiential
Inventory (REI) and Heuristic Responses to Vignettes
From Three Perspectives
Heuristic responses to vignettes

REI scale
Need for Cognition
Total
Men

Women
Faith in Intuition
Total

Self
perspective
(a = .46)

Protagonist
perspective
(a = .50)

-.30**
-.50*
-.23

-.10

.45***

Men

.44

Women

.45***

.04
.11
.14
.26
.08

Logical
perspective
(a = .84)
-.15
-.17
-.16
.26**
.41*
.21

Note. Men, n = 55; women, n= 129. Correlations are maximally corrected for attenuation. Significance levels refer to uncorrected correlations.

*p<.05. **p<.0\. ***/?<.001.

because responses from a self perspective are more relevant to
responses to the REI, which are also from a self perspective,
than responses from a protagonist perspective, which indicate
how one believes others behave.
The FI scores tend to produce stronger correlations than the
NFC scores with heuristic responses from both self and logical
perspectives. People with high FI scores respond more heuristically than others from a self perspective, and they are more
prone to regard their heuristic responses as logical. Individuals
high in NFC respond less heuristically than others from a self
perspective.
Joint effects ofNFC and FI. We conducted regression analyses to determine the unique contribution of each of the REI
scales to the prediction of the heuristic responses to the vignettes. Our main interest in doing these analyses was to determine whether the newly developed FI scale of experiential processing added to the prediction of heuristic responding beyond
the contribution of the well-established NFC scale. Hierarchical
regressions in which heuristic responses from each of the three
perspectives constituted the dependent variables were conducted. The independent variables (IVs), entered in the following order, were gender (treated as a control variable), NFC, and
FI. The interaction term (NFC X FI) was initially added in the
last step, but as it did not add to the prediction, it was left out.
For heuristic responses from the self perspective, after Step 3
with all IVs in the equation, R = .34, F ( 5 , 180) = 7.76, p <
.001. The inclusion of FI (0 = .25, p < .001) significantly improved the prediction of heuristic responses from the self perspective, after gender and NFC (0 = -.17, p < .05) had been
introduced (R2 = .1 1). The two REI scales contributed 9% of
unique variance to the prediction of heuristic responses: 6%
from the FI scale and 3% from the NFC scale. For heuristic
responses from the protagonist's perspective, none of the IVs
made a significant contribution to prediction, R = . 13, F (5,
180) = 1.11. For heuristic responses from a logical person's perspective, after Step 3 with all IVs in the equation, R = .29, F(5,

398

EPSTEIN, PACINI, DENES-RAJ, AND HEIER

180) = 5.31, p < .001. Only the FI scale (/S = .20, p < .01)
significantly contributed to the prediction of heuristic responses
from the logical perspective (4% of the unique variance). Responses from the logical perspective are a measure of participants' ability to distinguish rational from heuristic responding.
Those with high FI scores are apparently less able than others
to make this kind of distinction.
The regression results indicate that both experiential and rational processing, as measured by the FI and NFC scales, respectively, contribute to the prediction of heuristic responses
to the vignettes. This supports the view from CEST that it is
important to take into account two independent systems that
together determine behavior. Heuristic responses to vignettes
are determined primarily by experiential processing, but they
are also influenced by rational processing.
Study 2
The second study is a further examination of the reliability
and validity of the REI. We had the opportunity to administer
a short version of the REI to a very large student sample. The
REI was included in a questionnaire along with several measures of personality, adjustment, school achievement, and interpersonal relations. We wished to confirm the factor structure of
the REI that was found in Study 1 and to explore empirically
both the differential and supplementary relationships of FI and
NFC to a broad spectrum of personality, adjustment, achievement, and relationship variables.

Method
Sample and Procedure
Nitie hundred seventy-three participants (402 men and 571 women),
enrolled in undergraduate psychology classes at a large state university,
completed a large department-wide battery of prescreening questionnaires for course credit.

Measures
REI. Because of time and space limitations, we administered a 10item version of the REI, with 5 items from each scale. We selected the
best items (in terms of item-total correlations and factor loadings)
from Study 1 for each scale (see Table 2). Ten highly similar items were
selected from the original pool in Study 1 and correlated with the totals.
Both 5-item versions were strongly related to the originals (NFC: r =
.90, p < .001; FI: r = .85, p < .001), and they were not significantly
intercorrelated (r = - . 0 9 ) . Some of the NFC items were rewritten for
the sake of brevity and clarity. The items were rated on a 5-point scale,
from completely false to completely true.
Personality and adjustment measures. Respondents completed several measures of personality and psychological adjustment that were
part of the larger questionnaire. The California Personality Inventory
(CPI) Dominance Scale (Gough, 1969) contains 36 true-false items
designed to measure individual differences in need for social dominance. It is scored in the direction of dominance. In our sample, its
internal consistency ( a ) coefficient was .83. The 32-item Modern Racism Scale (MRS; McConahay, 1983) assesses racist attitudes in a subtle
and nonthreatening way (e.g., "In a democratic society, the opinion of
the majority should always prevail"). Answers to the MRS range from
0 (disagree strongly) to 4 (agree strongly). Its internal consistency coefficient was .82. A high score indicates racist attitudes.

Five items from the Affect Intensity Scale (AI; Larsen & Diener,
1987) were used to assess individual differences in emotionality associated with-processing in the two modes (e.g., "My emotions tend to be
more intense than those of most people"). Items were rated on a 5-point
scale, ranging from completely false to completely true. AI is scored in
the direction of greater emotionality. The internal consistency of the AI
scale in this sample was .70.
A I3-item version of the Beck Depression Inventory (BDI; Beck,
1967) measured symptoms of depression, including mood, lack of interest, and self-dislike. The BDI items are presented on a scale ranging
from 0 (no depression) to 3 (high depression). In this sample, it had an
internal consistency of .85.
The State-Trait Anxiety Inventory (Spielberger, Gorsuch, & Lushene, 1970) was used to measure symptoms of anxiety. Its 20 items were
answered on a 4-point scale that ranged from almost never to almost
always. High scores indicate greater anxiety. Its alpha reliability in the
current study was .91.
Self-esteem was assessed with the 10-item Rosenberg (1965) Self-Esteem Scale, designed to measure global feelings of self-worth in adolescents. It is a widely used scale with considerable evidence for reliability
and validity (see Blascovich & Tomaka, 1991). Responses were made
on a 4-point scale, ranging from strongly disagree to strongly agree. In
the current sample, its reliability was .88, and it was scored in the direction of greater self-esteem.
Traumatic experiences were assessed by having respondents indicate
the degree of traumatization they experienced, if at all, for 18 events,
such as death of a parent, parents* divorce, serious illness, and various
forms of abuse. These were rated on a 9-point scale ranging from not at
all traumatic to extremely traumatic and were summed to yield an overall traumatization score (a = .65). Three other items assessed whether
the respondent had experienced sexual, physical, or emotional abuse
before the age of 16 (a = .65).
Nine questions asked about stressful experiences in the college
context, such as romantic relationship problems, academic difficulties,
and financial problems. These items were based on a 4-point scale ranging from not at all to extremely. This scale had a reliability (a) of .66.
Two items assessed the frequency and quantity of alcohol consumption. High scores indicate frequent and/or heavy drinking. General
health was assessed with a single item that asked the respondents to
compare their own health with that of others their age. Math and Verbal
Scholastic Aptitude Test (SAT) scores were reported on a scale that
ranged from below 400 to 700 or above. Grade point average (GPA) was
reported on a scale ranging from below 2.0 to 3.0 or higher.
Interpersonal relationships. Respondents completed several indexes
of romantic and parental relationships. Working models of romantic
relationships, based on Bartholomew and Horowitz (1991), were assessed with ratings of four attachment prototypes: fearful, dismissing,
preoccupied, and secure. Respondents read the four attachment descriptions and rated the extent to which they described their feelings
in romantic relationships on an 8-point scale, ranging from not at all
descriptive to strongly descriptive. The fearful prototype describes fear
of intimate relationships and lack of trust in others. The dismissing
prototype describes the avoidance of close emotional relationships due
to the need for independence and self-sufficiency. The preoccupied prototype describes a desire for close emotional relationships that conflicts
with the fear of rejection. The secure prototype describes comfort and
security in close emotional relationships.
Three similar ratings were made of working models of mother and
father. The avoidant model describes a mother or father who was perceived to be cold, distant, and rejecting. The preoccupied model describes a mother or father who was perceived to be inconsistent, sometimes loving and sometimes rejecting. The secure model describes a
mother or father who was considered to be warm, responsive, and
supportive.

399

INDIVIDUAL DIFFERENCES IN THINKING STYLE

Table 5
Factor Loadings of the Rational-Experiential Inventory (REI) Items
Factor
REI scale and item
Need for Cognition
I don't like to have to do a lot of thinking. (R)
I try to avoid situations that require thinking in depth about something. (R)
I prefer to do something that challenges my thinking abilities rather than something
that requires little thought.
I prefer complex to simple problems.
Thinking hard and fora long time about something gives me little satisfaction.
Faith in Intuition
I trust my initial feelings about people.
I believe in trusting my hunches.
My initial impressions of people are almost always right.
When it comes to trusting people, I can usually rely on my "gut feelings."
I can usually feel when a person is right or wrong even if I can't explain how I know.
Eigenvalue

1

2

.77
.73

-.01
-.03

-.73
-.63

-.01

.59

.00

-.01

.00

.79
.73
.70
.63
.59

2.62

2.19

.02

-.10
-.05

.13

Note. N = 973. Values in boldface type indicate the highest factor loading for each item. (R) = reverse
scored.
The Straus (1979) Conflict Resolution Scale (CRS) assesses frequency in the use of tactics to settle disputes in the context of romantic
relationships. The items are presented in order of degree of aggression
(from "discussed the issue calmly" to "kicked, bit, or hit me with a fist
or object") and are answered on a scale ranging from never to 11 or more
times. The internal consistency of the CRS was .88. The CRS was scored
in the direction of greater use of aggressive tactics.
Other items assessed whether the respondent was currently in a relationship and number of sex partners.

Results and Discussion
Structure ofthe REI
The internal consistency (a) coefficients of the 5-item versions of the NFC and FI scales were .73 and .72, respectively.
Had the scales been of length comparable to those in Study 1
(19 items in NFC and 12 items in FI), the reliabilities, by the
Spearman-Brown prophesy formula, would increase to .91 for
NFC and .85 for FI. We subjected the 10 items to a principalcomponents factor analysis with varimax rotation in order to
confirm the factor structure obtained in Study 1. Only two factors with eigenvalues greater than 1.00 emerged, accounting for
48.2% of the variance. All of the NFC items loaded highly on
the first factor, which accounted for 26.3% of the variance (see
Table 5). The second factor contained all of the FI items and
accounted for 21.9% of the variance. The correlation between
NFC and FI, r(970) = .08, p < .001, though highly significant
because of the large sample size, indicated that the two scales
were largely independent. There were no significant gender
differences in NFC or FI scores. In sum, the short versions of
the NFC and FI scales are sufficiently reliable and independent,
replicating thefindingsof Study 1.
Relation of NFC and FI to Measures of Personality and
Psychological Adjustment
Separate effects of NFC and FI. Correlations of the REI
scores and measures of personality and psychological adjust-

ment are presented in Table 6, both for the total sample and
by gender. NFC was negatively correlated with racist attitudes,
depression, anxiety, stress in college life, and the frequency and
quantity of alcohol consumption, and was positively correlated
with dominance, self-esteem, satisfaction with health, SAT
scores, and GPA. NFC was also positively correlated with degree of traumatization and abuse, especially emotional abuse
before the age of 16. This correlation suggests that distressing
experiences may stimulate people to think seriously about their
lives. In the absence of such experiences, people may be less
prone to develop such an interest.
Correlations with FI are generally in the same direction as
those with NFC but are smaller in magnitude. FI, like NFC,
was significantly positively correlated with dominance and selfesteem and significantly negatively correlated with depression,
anxiety, and stress in college life. Neither FI nor NFC was significantly related to affect intensity.
The pattern of correlations between the REI scales and personality and adjustment was generally similar for men and
women, with a few exceptions. The relations of NFC and modern racist attitudes and stress in college life were in the same
direction, but significantly stronger, for men than for women.
The correlation between NFC and SAT scores was significantly
stronger for women than for men. With regard to FI, the correlation with dominance was stronger for women, whereas the correlation with depression was stronger for men.
Joint effects of NFC and FI. To test for the additive effects
of the REI scores in predicting personality and psychological
adjustment, we conducted regressions with those variables with
which both the NFC and FI scales were significantly correlated.
The predictors, in order of entry, were sex (control variable),
NFC and FI, and the interaction of NFC and FI. The interaction
term did not contribute significantly to prediction in any of the
cases.
In predicting dominance scores, both NFC (/3 = .30, p <
.001) and FI (/S = .07, p < .05) were significant predictors, ac-

400

EPSTEIN. PACINI, DENES-RAJ, AND HEIER

Table 6
Correlations of the Need for Cognition and Faith in Intuition (Short Forms) Scales
With Personality and Psychological Adjustment
Faith in Intuition

Need for Cognition
Personality and
adjustment

Men

CPI Dominance
Modern Racism
Affect Intensity
BDI Depression
State-Trait Anxiety
Rosenberg Self-Esteem
Traumatization
Abuse (sum)
Sexual Abuse
Physical Abuse
Emotional Abuse
Stress in college life
Drinking
General health
SAT (math + verbal)
GPA

.34** •
1
-.36**"
-.04
-.30** *
-.32** t
.33** •
.12
.07
.00
.01
.08
-.33***
-.18***
.12*
.38***
.14**

Women

Total

Men

Women

Total

.44***

.39***
-.26***
-.06
-.24***
-.30***
.35***
.10*
.10*
.06
.03
.07*
-.20***
-.13***
.08*
.28***
.13***

.02
.00
.01
-.17**
-.24***
.20***
-.08
.05
-.02
-.07
-.01
-.17*
-.04
-.09
-.04
.02

.18**
.00
.03
-.04
-.14**
.18***
-.06
.08
-.04
-.01
-.02
-.10
-.00
.03
.05
.00

.12*
.01
.03
-.09*
-.17**
.18***
.01
-.04
-.03
-.04
-.01
-.11*
-.03
.02
.00
.01

-.18**
-.08
—.21***
-.30***
.37***

.08
.14*
.09*
.06
.06
-.13*
.09*
-.06
.55***
.13***

Note. Women, n = 495-571; men, n = 358-401. Gender is partialed out of correlations for the total
sample. Numbers in boldface type indicate a significant gender difference. Correlations are maximally
corrected for attenuation. Significance levels refer to uncorrected correlations. CPI = California Personality
Inventory; BDI = Beck Depression Inventory; SAT = Scholastic Aptitude Test; GPA = grade point average.

*/?<.05. **p<.0\. ***p<.00\.

counting for 9% and 1%, respectively, of the unique variance, R
= .32, F(3, 855) = 32.92, p < .001. NFC (/? = -.19,p < .05)
and FI (/3 = —.06, p < .05) were both significant predictors of
depression scores, R = .32, F(3, 956) = 14.11, p < .001. Together they accounted for 5% of the unique variance (NFC; 4%;
FI: 1%). Sex (0 = .01,p < .05), NFC (0 = -.24,p < .05), and
FI(0 = -A3,p< .05) were all significant predictors of anxiety
scores, R = .30, F(3, 969) = 31.27,/? < .001. NFC contributed
the most unique variance (6%), followed by FI (2%) and sex
(1%). Virtually the same pattern emerged in predicting stress
in college scores, R = .20, F(3, 910) = 32.92, p < .001. In the
case of self-esteem scores, both NFC (0 = .50, p < .05) and FI
(/J = .31, p < .05) were significant predictors, R = .32, F(3,
953) = 35.27, p < .001. NFC contributed the most unique variance (8%), followed by FI (2.25%).
In sum, the pattern of results suggests that NFC and FI make
independent and supplemental contributions to predicting personality and psychological adjustment, in line with predictions
from CEST. The results also show that NFC tends to be a
stronger predictor than FI of personality and adjustment.
The REI and Interpersonal Relationships
Table 7 presents the correlations between REI scores and interpersonal relationship variables. The pattern of correlations
suggests that individuals with high NFC scores tend not to have
a preoccupied style in their romantic relationships. Compared
to individuals with low NFC scores, those with high NFC scores
tended to report fewer sex partners and to characterize their
fathers' relationships with them as avoidant. There were several
significant gender differences in NFC and relationship corre-

lations. Women with high NFC scores were more likely than
men to report having a dismissive style in their intimate relationships and to adopt calm, rational tactics for dealing with
relationship conflicts, which is in line with the characterization
of the exclusively rational person as lacking in emotion-based
motivation. For men, NFC was negatively related to a secure
model of their fathers.
The relationship picture for FI is somewhat more favorable
than for NFC. FI was positively correlated with a secure style in
romantic relationships. Significant gender differences in correlations show that for men, but not for women, FI was positively
associated with a secure model of their mothers. Men high in
FI were also more likely to be in a significant romantic
relationship.
In general, the pattern of correlations suggests that although
individuals high in NFC show positive psychological adjustment, they tend to report early experiences of emotional abuse
and distress in relationships with parents. Presently, they report
a tendency to avoid close, emotional relationships. This pattern
is especially true of women. Individuals high in FI tend to report
having secure relationships, and this is equally true for men and
women. Both NFC and FI are positively related to psychological
adjustment, each contributing independently.
General Discussion
Two Independent Processing Modes
The presentfindingscontribute to an increasing body of evidence in support of the construct validity of CEST (e.g., DenesRaj & Epstein, 1994; Epstein, 1993, 1994; Epstein et al., 1992;

401

INDIVIDUAL DIFFERENCES IN THINKING STYLE

Table 7
Correlations ofthe Needfor Cognition and Faith in Intuition (Short Forms)
Scales With Relationship Variables
Need for Cognition
Relationship Variable
Relationship prototype
Fearful
Preoccupied
Dismissive
Secure
Working model of mother
Avoidant
Preoccupied
Secure
Working model of father
Avoidant
Preoccupied
Secure
Conflict resolution
In a relationship
Number of sex partners

Faith in Intuition

Men

Women

Total

Men

Women

Total

-.09
-.11
.00
.06

-.03
-.08
.15**
.08

-.06
-.09**
.09**
.07

-.04
-.02
.04
.21***

-.06
-.08
.06
.18***

-.05
-.06
.06
.20***

-.03
.04
-.04

.07
.00
-.01

.03
.02
-.03

-.07
-.08
.17**

.00
-.01
.01

-.02
-.02
.08*

.09
-.00
-.16**
-.11
.04
-.11*

.09
.00
-.01
-.20***
.00
-.05

.09*
.01
-.09*
-.17**
.02
-.08*

-.02
-.02
.09
-.01
.23***
.07

.02
-.02
.06
.07
.01
.03

.01
-.02
.06
.02
.11**
.05

Note. Women, n = 500-570; men, n = 335-402. Gender is partialed out of total sample correlations.
Correlations are maximally corrected for attenuation. Significance levels refer to uncorrected correlations.
* p < . 0 5 . **p<.01. ***p<.001.

Epstein, Denes-Raj, & Pacini, 1995; Kirkpatrick & Epstein,
1992). CEST proposes that there are two information processing systems, experiential and rational, that are independent and
operate by different rules. In two studies, we tested the prediction that there would be reliable individual differences in the
extent to which people rely on each system. To this end, we
constructed a self-report measure, the REI, which consists of
subscales to measure individual differences in analytic-rational
(NFC) and intuitive-experiential (FI) processing.
Evidence for the reliability and validity of the two REI scales
is substantial. The factor structure of the REI, obtained in
Study 1 and replicated in Study 2, showed the existence of two
orthogonal factors, corresponding to NFC and FI. This supports the view that the two kinds of processing are not opposite
equivalents but represent two kinds of information processing
that are independent.
Further support for the independence of the two systems was
provided by evidence showing that they operate by different
rules. According to CEST, the rational system operates by abstract, general rules guided by analysis and logic, whereas the
experiential system operates by context-specific, heuristic rules.
In Study 1, responses to the vignettes from the protagonist and
self perspectives, designed to elicit experiential processing,
showed more context specificity than those from the logical perspective. Moreover, heuristic processing across a sample of vignettes was shown to be primarily a function of experiential
processing. This is consistent with the assumption in CEST that
the experiential system is the natural, or "default" mode of responding to situations.
Other evidence for the existence of two modes of processing
is that people are aware of two different ways of thinking. Consistent with previousfindings(Epstein et al., 1992; Kirkpatrick
& Epstein, 1992), this was demonstrated in Study 1, in which

participants appropriately shifted from one mode of processing
principles to the other in responding to the vignettes, depending
on the perspective they were asked to take. They reported that
people in everyday life, including themselves, respond experientially, in contrast to the way a logical person would respond.
However, failure to discriminate between the two modes occurred in those with high FI scores, which suggests that strong
experientiality may interfere with logical thinking; that is, people who are strongly experiential tend to accept their heuristic
thinking as rational.
According to CEST, although rational and experiential processing are independent, they contribute jointly to behavior. We
tested this assumption in Study 1 and Study 2 with regression
analysis, in which the independent and joint contributions of
NFC and FI to the prediction of coping ability, heuristic processing, and adjustment were examined. As NFC has been
shown to be a significant predictor in past research (e.g., Cacioppo et al., 1983), the question remained whether a measure of
intuitive-experiential processing, FI, would contribute independently. Study 1 provided evidence that in the case of an objective, non-self-report measure of heuristic processing, FI not
only added to the prediction but also was a stronger predictor
than NFC.

Relation ofRational and Experiential Processing to
Coping and Adjustment
Further evidence for the independent contributions of rational and experiential processing was provided in Studies 1 and
2, in which the relation of the REI scales to measures of coping
and adjustment were examined. In Study 1, aspects of coping
ability, as assessed by the Constructive Thinking Inventory
(Epstein & Meier, 1989), were differentially associated with the

402

EPSTEIN, PACINI, DENES-RAJ, AND HEIER

two REI scores. Compared to those with lower NFC scores, people with higher NFC scores were better copers, generally, and
particularly better behavioral copers. They also reported that
they avoid naive, overly optimistic thinking, in contrast to those
with high FI scores, who tend to be naive optimists. Experiential
processing, as indexed by FI, was associated with both constructive and irrational forms of positive thinking: It was directly
associated with aspects of constructive behavioral coping, such
as positive thinking and conscientiousness, as well as irrational
forms, such as esoteric thinking (e.g., superstitions, occult
beliefs) and naive optimism.
In Study 2, NFC and FI were both associated with a variety of
self-report measures of adjustment and academic performance.
Although the two modes made significant and independent contributions in predicting these variables, the contribution was
greater for NFC. This is in contrast to the non-self-report measures of heuristic responses to vignettes in Study 1 and interpersonal relationship variables in Study 2. In general, both contributed independently to predicting adjustment, supporting our
contention that positive adjustment requires the appropriate
use of both systems.
The reason for the stronger influence of NFC than FI as a
predictor of adjustment may be that people cannot afford to be
irrational (to have low rationality), whereas there is more leeway with intuitive processing. To the extent that an individual's
processing is irrational, one would expect that maladjustment is
present. Because most people's experiential systems have both
adaptive and maladaptive aspects, the relation of experiential
processing to adjustment turns out to be weaker, but in the same
direction, as rational processing. The rational system may also
be characterized as a conscious, "executive" process, and therefore it is more directly related than experiential processing to
the mechanisms that govern self-regulation and coping, and
hence self-reported psychological adjustment.
In terms of interpersonal relationships, the weight of adjustment shifts toward experiential processing. FI was positively associated with reported secure relationships with both a current
intimate partner and for men only, with a mother. NFC, though
directly related to rational, nonaggressive tactics for dealing
with interpersonal conflicts, was associated with having fewer
sex partners; a dismissive, avoiding relationship style for
women; and avoidant, insecure models of father. Together with
the small but significant relation to trauma and emotional
abuse before the age of 16, this pattern of correlations suggests
that the current psychological adjustment of at least some of the
people with high NFC scores may have come with a price: less
satisfying, close interpersonal relations.
It is interesting to speculate on this situation for people high
in rationality, as measured by NFC. The reports of early difficult experiences, including relationships with parents, point to
a possible developmental path of the rational system. Difficult
life experiences may encourage the development of rationality
as the individual pursues ways to manage emotions and to cope.
However, rationality developed through adversity may take on a
somewhat protective or defensive character, in the suppression
or rejection of experientiality, which is the seat of emotional
reactions and, as shown earlier, is associated with positive relationships. The development of defensiveness might even be
more likely when the difficult life experiences occur at an early

age, before the individual is capable of assimilating and accommodating the information at a higher, more flexible and integrated level. In future work, it will be informative to tease apart
actual from "illusory" mental health (Shedler, Mayman, &
Manis, 1993) in those with simultaneously high scores on rationality and low scores on experientiality.

Gender and Thinking Style
The significant gender difference in NFC scores in Study 1
was not replicated with the much larger sample of Study 2. Although mean levels of rational and experiential processing may
be similar for men and women, the two studies showed that they
have some different correlates depending on gender. For example, Study 1 showed that in terms of coping, self-reported interest in rationality seems to be more critical for men than for
women.
Stereotypes about differences in thinking styles associated
with gender are widely held in western society (e.g., Gilligan,
1982; Tomlinson-Keasey, 1994). Rational, logical thinking is
associated with masculinity, whereas intuitive, feeling-based
thinking is associated with femininity. As a result, departures
from gender stereotypes with regard to intuitive and rational
thinking may have different consequences for men and women.
In our studies, women with self-reported high rationality tended
to show distrust of others, they reported early experiences of
sexual abuse, and they tended to avoid becoming involved in
intimate relationships. Women who disconfirm the stereotype
of femininity by being very rational or intellectually oriented
may be subject to problems with interpersonal relations (see
also Block & Kremen, 1996). People may react negatively to a
woman who does not confirm their expectations, and she may
eventually internalize such reactions. In contrast, our data suggest that men who disconfirm the stereotype of masculinity by
being more experiential or intuitive fared well in their relationships with their mothers during childhood and currently with
intimate partners. It remains for future work to replicate these
findings and to explore further the different meanings that the
two modes of processing have for women and men.
Future Directions
In this article we addressed the issue of whether the two
modes of processing, as measured by the REI, are independent
or inversely related (i.e., bipolar). The results favored the independent relation of the two systems. However, this relationship
was based on data from a sample with a narrow range of age and
education, namely college students. If cognitive development in
adulthood entails the increasing integration of the two systems,
a significant positive relationship between FI and NFC might be
present in older samples. In contrast, younger participants may
exhibit an inverse relation. The investigation of the developmental aspects of the two modes of information processing and
their interrelation is an important avenue for future work.
Although in its present form the REI consists of broad scales
to measure rational and experiential processing, this does not
preclude the possibility that in future work it may be possible to
measure specific facets of the two kinds of processing. Just as
there are several "rational" abilities (e.g., mathematical, verbal,

INDIVIDUAL DIFFERENCES IN THINKING STYLE

abstract logic, introspection, etc.), there may also be several experiential abilities, such as visualization, imagination, and aesthetic sensibility.
References
Anderson, J. R. (1982). Acquisition of cognitive skill. Psychological Review, 89, 369-406.
Axsom, D., Yates, S., & Chaiken, S. (1987). Audience responses as a
heuristic cue in persuasion. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 53, 30-40.
Bargh, J. A. (1989). Conditional automaticity: Varieties of automatic
influence in social perception and cognition. In J. S. Uleman & J. A.
Bargh (Eds.), Unintended thought (pp. 3-51). New York: Guilford
Press.
Bartholomew, K.,& Horowitz, L. M. (1991). Attachment styles among
young adults: A test of a four category model. Journal of Personality
and Social Psychology, 61, 226-244.
Beck, A. T. (1967). Depression: Causes and treatment. Philadelphia:
University of Pennsylvania Press.
Blascovich, J., & Tomaka, J. (1991). Measures of self-esteem. In J. R.
Robinson, P. R. Shaver, & L. S. Wrightsman (Eds.), Measures of personality and social psychological attitudes (pp. 115-160). San Diego,
CA: Academic Press.
Block, J., & Kremen, A. (1996). IQ and ego-resiliency: Conceptual and
empirical connections and separateness. Journal of Personality and
Social Psychology, 70, 349-361.
Briggs, K. C , & Myers, I. B. (1976). Myers-Briggs Type Indicator. Palo
Alto, CA: Consulting Psychologists Press.
Bruner, J. S. (1986). Actual minds, possible worlds. Cambridge, MA:
Harvard University Press.
Bucci, W. (1985). Dual coding: A cognitive model for psychoanalytic
research. Journal of the American Psychoanalytic Association, 33,
571-607.
Buck, R. (1985). Prime theory: An integrated view of motivation and
emotion. Psychological Review, 92, 389-413.
Cacioppo, J. T, & Petty, R. E. (1982). The need for cognition. Journal
of Personality and Social Psychology, 42, 116-131.
Cacioppo, J. T, Petty, R. E., & Morris, K. J. (1983). Effects of need for
cognition on message evaluation, recall, and persuasion. Journal of
Personality and Social Psychology, 45. 805-818.
Chaiken, S. (1980). Heuristic versus systematic information processing
and the use of source versus message cues in persuasion. Journal of
Personality and Social Psychology, 39, 752-766.
Denes-Raj, V., & Epstein, S. (1994). Conflict between experiential and
rational processing: When people behave against their better judgment. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 66, 819-829.
Epstein, S. (1983). The unconscious, the preconscious and the self-concept. In J. Suls& A. Greenwald (Eds.), Psychological perspectives on
the self (Vol. 2, pp. 219-247). Hillsdale, NJ: Erlbaum.
Epstein, S. (1990). Cognitive-experiential self-theory. In L. Pervin
(Ed.), Handbook of personality theory and research (pp. 165-192).
New York: Guilford Press.
Epstein, S. (1991). Cognitive-experiential self-theory: An integrative
theory of personality. In R. Curtis (Ed.), The relational self: Convergences in psychoanalysis and social psychology (pp. 111-137).
New York: Guilford Press.
Epstein, S. (1992a). Constructive thinking and mental and physical
well-being. In L. Montada, S. H. Filipp, & M. J. Lerner (Eds.), Life
crises & experiences of loss in adulthood (pp. 385-409). Hillsdale,
NJ: Erlbaum.
Epstein, S. (1992b). Coping ability, negative self-evaluation, and overgeneralization: Experiment and theory. Journal of Personality and
Social Psychology, 62, 826-836.

403

Epstein, S. (1993). Implications of cognitive-experiential self-theory
for personality and developmental psychology. In D. Funder, R.
Parke, C. Tomlinson-Keasey, & K. Widaman (Eds.), Studying lives
through time: Personality and development (pp. 399-438). Washington, DC: American Psychological Association.
Epstein, S. (1994). Integration of the cognitive and the psychodynamic
unconscious. American Psychologist, 49, 709-724.
Epstein, S. (with Brodsky, A.). (1993). You 're smarter than you think:
How to develop your practical intelligence for success in living. New
York: Simon & Schuster.
Epstein, S., Denes-Raj, V., & Pacini, R. (1995). The Linda problem
revisited from the perspective of cognitive-experiential self-theory.
Personality and Social Psychology Bulletin, 21, 1124-1138.
Epstein, S., & Katz, L. (1992). Coping ability, stress, productive load,
and symptoms. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 62,
813-825.
Epstein, S., Lipson, A., Holstein, C , & Huh, E. (1992). Irrational reactions to negative outcomes: Evidence for two conceptual systems.
Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 62, 328-339.
Epstein, S., & Meier, P. (1989). Constructive thinking: A broad coping
variable with specific components. Journal of Personality and Social
Psychology, 57, 332-349.
Eysenck, H. J., & Eysenck, S. B. G. (1976). Psychoticism as a dimension of personality. London: Hodder and Stoughton.
Fiske, S. X, & Taylor, S. E. (1991). Social cognition (2nd ed.). New
York: McGraw-Hill.
Gilligan, C. (1982). In a different voice: Psychological theory and women 's development. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.
Gough, H. G. (1969). The CPI manual. (rev. ed.). Palo Alto, CA: Consulting Psychologists Press.
Higgins, E. T. (1989). Knowledge accessibility and activation: Subjectivity and suffering from unconscious sources. In J. S. Uleman &
J. A. Bargh (Eds.), Unintended thought (pp. 3-51). New York: Guilford Press.
Jung, C. G. (1964/1968). Analytical psychology: Its theory and practice. New York: Pantheon Press.
Kahneman, D., & Miller, D. T. (1986). Norm theory: Comparing reality to its alternatives. Psychological Review, 93, 136-153.
Kahneman, D., & Tversky, A. (1982). The simulation heuristic. In D.
Kahneman, P. Slovic, & A. Tversky (Eds.), Judgment under uncertainty: Heuristics and biases (pp. 201-208). New York: Cambridge
University Press.
Katz, L., & Epstein, S. (1991). Constructive thinking and coping with
laboratory-induced stress. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 61, 789-800.
Kirkpatrick, L. A., & Epstein, S. (1992). Cognitive-experiential selftheory and subjective probability: Further evidence for two conceptual systems. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 63, 534544.
Labouvie-Vief, G. (1990). Wisdom as integrated thought: Historical
and developmental perspectives. In R. J. Sternberg (Ed.), Wisdom: Its
nature, origins, and development (pp. 52-83). New York: Cambridge
University Press.
Larsen, R. J., & Diener, E. (1987). Affect intensity as an individual
difference characteristic: A review. Journal of Research in Personality, 21, 1-39.
Leventhal, H. (1984). A perceptual-motor theory of emotion. In L.
Berkowitz (Ed.), Advances in experimental social psychology (Vol.
17, pp. 117-182). New York: Academic Press.
Luria, A. R. (1961). The role of speech in the regulation of normal and
abnormal behavior. Oxford, England: Pergamon Press.
McConahay, J. B. (1983). Modern racism and modern discrimination:
The effects of race, racial attitudes, and context on simulated hiring
decisions. Personality and Social Psychology Bulletin, 9, 551-558.

404

EPSTEIN, PACINI, DENES-RAJ, AND HEIER

Morgan, J. N., Larrick, R. P., & Nisbett, R. E. (1990). Teaching the use
of cost-benefit reasoning in everyday life. Psychological Science, 1,
362-370.
Paivio, A. (1986). Mental representations: A dual-coding approach.
New York: Oxford University Press.
Pennington, N. (1990). The complexity of human responses to
(apparently) simple judgment problems. Contemporary Psychology,
35, 32-33.
Petty, R. E., Schumann, D. W., Richman, S. A., & Strathman, A. J.
(1993). Positive mood and persuasion: Different roles for affect under
high- and low-elaboration conditions. Journal of Personality and SociaiPsychology, 64, 5-20.
Rosch, E. (1983). Prototype classification and logical classification:
The two systems. In E. Scholnick (Ed.), New trends in conceptual
representation/ Challenges to Piaget 's theory (pp. 73-86). Hillsdale,
NJ: Erlbaum.
Rosenberg, M. (1965). Society and the adolescent self-image.
Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press.

Shedler, J., Mayman, M , & Manis, M. (1993). The illusion of mental
health. American Psychologist, 48, 1117-1131.
Spielberger, C. D., Gorsuch, R. L., & Lushene, R. E. (1970). Manual
for the State-Trait Anxiety Inventory. Palo Alto, CA: Consulting Psychologists Press.
Straus, M. A. (1979). Measuring intra-family conflict and violence:
The conflict tactics (CT) scales. Journal of Marriage and the Family,
41, 75-88.
Tomlinson-Keasey, C. (1994). My dirty little secret: Women as clandestine intellectuals. In C. E. Franz & A. J. Stewart (Eds.), Women creating lives (pp. 227-245). Boulder, CO: Westview Press.
Tversky, A., & Kahneman, D. (1983). Extensional versus intuitive reasoning. The conjunction fallacy in probability judgment. Psychological Review, 90,293-315.
Weinberger, J., & McClelland, D. C. (1991). Cognitive versus traditional motivational models: Irreconcilable or complementary? In
E. T. Higgins & R. M. Sorrentino (Eds.), Handbook of motivation
and cognition (Vol. 2, pp. 562-597). New York: Guilford Press.

Appendix
Vignettes
Near Versus Far Misses
Ms. Crane and Ms. Tees were scheduled to leave the airport at the
same time, but on different flights. They travelled from town in the same
limousine, were caught in a traffic jam, and arrived at the airport 30
minutes after the scheduled departure of their flights. Ms. Crane was
told that her flight had left on time. Ms. Tees was told that herflighthad
been delayed and had left only 5 minutes ago. They both dawdled for
ten minutes before leaving home. Who do you think felt her dawdling
was more foolish?
Last week Ted went shopping at a grocery store and was going to try
his luck on a scratch-and-win ticket given with every purchase. Ted eagerly scratched his ticket, but won nothing. As he was about to leave, he
was startled by a shriek of joy. The person right behind him had just
won $500. Two days later his friend Jim went shopping at the same
grocery store and also tried his luck on a scratch-and-win ticket. He was
at the end of a long line, when he heard a shout of joy coming from the
front of the line. Someone had just won $500. Jim won nothing. Who
do you think was more upset when they thought about the incident?

Usual Versus Unusual Behaviors
Mr. Adams was involved in an accident when driving home after work
on his usual route. He thought about taking a more scenic route, but
decided against it. Mr. White was involved in a similar accident when
driving on a route that he only takes when he wants a change of scenery.
Who do you think felt more foolish about his decision?
Mr. Simon was planning to have a relaxed evening in front of the TV.
On his way home from work he decided to stop at a convenience store
where he usually shops. When he got there, there was a sign that the
owner had to leave, but would be back in 15 minutes. Rather than wait,
he drove to another store in a similar neighborhood. Just as he was
about to go through the checkout, there was a disruption near the door
and he saw a man with a mask carrying a gun. The next thing he knew,
he heard what sounded like a loud firecracker and felt a sharp pain in
his right arm. In the hospital, he learned that as a result of the gunshot
he had lost the use of his right arm. Now consider a slightly different

version. Mr. Green had exactly the same thing happen to him while
shopping at the store where he usually shops. Who do you think felt
more foolish about stopping at the store?
Carol almost never takes hitch-hikers in her car. Yesterday she gave a
man a ride and was robbed. Nancy frequently takes hitch-hikers in her
car. Yesterday she gave a man a ride and was robbed. Who do you think
felt more upset about giving the hitch-hiker a ride?

Acts of Commission Versus Omission
Celia bought a lottery ticket where the winner was to receive a new
car. As her lucky number was " 3 " she had an inclination to select number 0003. Her friend told her it would be even better if she bet on
multiples of 3, such as 0369. She took her friend's advice. As luck would
have it, the winning number was 0003. Now imagine a slightly different
version in which everything is the same except Celia ignored her friend's
advice and selected 0003. The winning number was 0369, the number
her friend suggested. In which version did Celia feel more foolish about
her decision?
Paul worked for United Van Lines. Last year he considered switching
to Allied Van Lines but decided against it. A month ago Paul was permanently laid off due to the bad economic situation of the company. If
he had switched to Allied Van lines he would still be employed. George
worked for Allied Van Lines. Last year he switched to United Van Lines.
A month ago George was permanently laid off due to the bad economic
situation of the company. If he had not switched, he would still be employed. Who do you think felt more foolish about his decision?
Debbie attended a rock concert and occupied seat 307. At the end of
the concert it was announced that a seat number would be randomly
chosen, and its occupant would win $ 1,000. Debbie decided to move to
the seat next to hers, number 308. As luck would have it, 307 was the
winning number. Now imagine a slightly different version. Sandra occupied seat 307, thought of moving to 308, but decided against it. As
luck would have it, 308 was the lucky number. Who do you think felt
more foolish about her decision?

INDIVIDUAL DIFFERENCES IN THINKING STYLE

Costs Versus Benefits
Susan decided to go to a special showing of a foreign film. She was
willing to spend the $9.00 that it cost because she thought it would be
very interesting. Halfway through the movie, she decided the movie was
very boring. Now imagine a slightly different scene. Mary received a
ticket to the same movie from a friend who wasn't able to use it. Assume
Mary had exactly the same information and expectations as Susan, and
was equally bored. Who do you think is more likely to walk out of the
movie sooner?
Steven had heard from his friend Jonathan about the fantastic cake
he had eaten during his vacation, when on a visit to Turkey. As Steve
had a sweet tooth, he was determined to try it. Fortunately, he heard
about a delicatessen store in the next town, which supposedly had a
good selection of foreign foods. The next day he drove there and sure
enough he found what he was looking for. The cake was very expensive,
and cost him $4.50 for a single piece. Now imagine a slightly different
version. Bill, another friend of Jonathan, had heard exactly the same
thing. Assume that everything is the same except that when Bill went to
the delicatessen, he was fortunate enough to run into a special promotion and got the same pastry for 25 cents. When both of them tasted the

405

cake, they decided it was too sweet for their taste. Who do you think will
be more likely to take more bites before discarding the cake?
Mrs. Carlson was invited to visit the wife of her husband's very
wealthy boss. As she could not get a baby sitter, she asked if she could
bring her four year old son Robert. She was told she could bring him
only if he were a very well-behaved child, as Mrs. Coles had very expensive antiques in her living room. Although Mrs. Carlson had told her son
he was not to run in the house, Robert began to chase the dog around
the living room. Before Mrs. Carlson could stop him, a small vase came
crashing to the floor. Surprisingly, Mrs. Coles was not at all upset. She
told Mrs. Carlson it was not an expensive piece, and she had, in fact,
been thinking of getting rid of it. Now imagine a slightly different version in which everything is the same except that Mrs. Coles is very upset,
and blurts out in her distress that the vase cost over $ 1000, and was her
favorite vase. Mrs. Carlson knows that they will have to replace the vase,
although they can ill afford it. In which version do you think Mrs. Carlson was more angry?

Received July 21, 1995
Revision received December 6, 1995
Accepted December 9, 1995 •

