Journal of Penonality and Social Psychology
1987, Vol. 52, No. 4,663-616

Copyright 1987 by the American Psychological Association. Inc.
0022-35 M/87/S00.7J

Self-Complexity as a Cognitive Buffer Against
Stress-Related Illness and Depression
Patricia W. Linville
Yale University
This prospective study tested the self-complexity buffering hypothesis that greater self-complexity
moderates the adverse impact of stress on depression and illness. This hypothesis follows from a
model that assumes self-knowledge is represented in terms of multiple self-aspects. As denned in
this model, greater self-complexity involves representing the self in terms of a greater number of
cognitive self-aspects and maintaining greater distinctions among self-aspects. Subjects completed
measures of stressful events, self-complexity, depression, and illness in two sessions separated by 2
weeks. A multiple regression analysis used depression and illness at Time 2 as outcomes, stressful
life events and self-complexity at Time 1 as predictors, and depression and illness at Time 1 as
control variables. The Stress X Self-Complexity interaction provided strong support for the buffering
hypothesis. Subjects higher in self-complexity were less prone to depression, perceived stress, physical symptoms, and occurrence of the flu and other illnesses following high levels of stressful events.
These results suggest that vulnerability to stress-related depression and illness is due, in part, to
differences in cognitive representations of the self.

The basic hypothesis of this article is that a complex cognitive
representation of the self serves to moderate the adverse physical and mental health effects of stressful events. Both major life
events (e.g., divorce, death of a spouse, job loss) and the accumulation of minor hassles are associated with physical and
mental health problems (see Dohrenwend & Dohrenwend,
1978; Kanner, Coyne, Shaefer, & Lazarus, 1980; Silver & Wortman, 1980; Thoits, 1983a). But although the association between stressful events and physical or mental health problems
is consistently observed, it tends to be only weak to moderate.
Some people are more susceptible than others to the adverse
consequences of stress. Circumstances that adversely affect
some people leave others seemingly unaffected. Individual
differences in reactions to stressful events have led researchers
to posit factors that moderate the relation between stressful
events and their adverse outcomes. The moderator most cited
as a buffer against the unhealthy consequences of stress is social
support (e-g., Cassel, 1976; Cobb, 1976; Cohen & Hoberman,
1983; Dean & Lin, 1977; Kaplan, Cassel, & Gore, 1977; LaRocco, House, & French, 1980). Other moderators include cognitive coping strategies (e.g., Lazarus & Launier. 1978; Pearlin
& Schooler, 1978; Silver &Wortman, 1980; Taylor, 1983), locus

of control (e.g., Johnson & Sarason, l978;Lefcourt, 1981), private self-consciousness (Mullen & Suls, 1982), and hardiness
(Kobasa, 1979).
There is a growing recognition that self-cognitions play a role
in coping, depression, and various mental health processes (e.g.,
Beck, 1976; Cantor & Kihlstrom, 1986; Higgins, Klein, &
Strauman, 1985; Kuiper & Derry, 1981; Linville, 1985). The
model proposed in this article suggests that individual differences in vulnerability to stress are due, in part, to differences in
cognitive representations of the self, more specifically, to
differences in the complexity of self-representations. As I define
the concept, greater self-complexity entails cognitively organizing self-knowledge in terms of a greater number of self-aspects
and maintaining greater distinctions among self-aspects. The
basic hypothesis is that greater self-complexity moderates the
adverse impact of stressful events on physical and mental health
outcomes. Thus, greater self-complexity is a protective factor
for people under stress.
Consider the example of a woman going through a divorce.
Assume that she has a simple self-representation with only two
important self-aspects, wife and lawyer. Furthermore, assume
that these two self-aspects are closely associated in memory,
perhaps because her husband is also an attorney with whom
she has shared many professional experiences. In this case, the
negative affect and self-appraisal associated with her divorce
will be massive because it will spill over to affect her thoughts
and feelings about both important aspects of her self. In contrast, consider a woman with a more complex self-representation that involves several important self-aspects, for example,
wife, lawyer, tennis player, and friend. Furthermore, assume
that the self-aspect wife is not closely associated in memory
with other self-aspects. In this case, negative affect and self-appraisal associated with the divorce are less likely to spill over

This research was supported by Grant 1 R03 MH 38066-01 from
the National Institute of Mental Health. Portions of the research were
presented at the Conference on Social Cognition in Nags Head, North
Carolina, in May 1984.
I would like to thank Eve Wittenberg for her assistance in collecting
data and Gregory Fischer and the participants at the Nap Head conference for their helpful suggestions.
Correspondence concerning this article should be addressed to Patricia W. Linville, Department of Psychology, Yale University, Box 11A,
Yale Station, New Haven, Connecticut 06520.

663

664

PATRICIA W, LINVILLE

and adversely affect her feelings about other self-aspects. Thus,

and propositions, it is distinct to the extent that it is represented

there will be three unaffected self-aspects to buffer against nega-

by different features or propositions. As defined in Linville's

tive feelings associated with the divorce.

model, greater self-complexity involves having more self-aspects and maintaining greater distinctions among self-aspects.

When self-aspects are few and undifferentiated, a stressful
event in one aspect tends to spill over and color thoughts and
feelings about other aspects. For people who maintain more aspects and perceive greater distinctions among self-aspects, the
impact of a negative event is likely to be confined to a smaller
proportion of their self-representation. Thus, they are more
likely to maintain positive thoughts and feelings about some
self-aspects despite the negative impact of stress in one area.
These positive thoughts and feelings about other self-aspects
may act as buffers against the negative thoughts and feelings that
result from stressful events. The greater the proportion of unaffected self-aspects, the greater the potential buffering effect. If
one assumes that negative thoughts and feelings about various
self-aspects contribute to stress reactions and their physical and
mental health consequences, then maintaining more distinct
self-aspects should act as a buffer against these adverse consequences of stress.

The Self-Complexity Model
The prediction that greater self-complexity provides a buffer
against the adverse consequences of stress is based on an extension of Linville's model of the relation between self-complexity
and affective extremity. In this section, I will briefly summarize
the key assumptions of this model and then discuss its implications for physical illness and depression. (For a fuller description of the model, see Linville, 1985.)

Self-Representation
The self-complexity model assumes that knowledge about the
self is represented in terms of multiple cognitive structures,
which are referred to here as self-aspects. This assumption is
consistent with a variety of theories that view the self as multifaceted (e.g., Gergen, 1971; Greenwald & Pratkanis, 1984;
James, 1892; Kihlstrom& Cantor, 1983;Kuiper&Derry, 1981;
Markus & Nurius, 1986; Rogers, 1981; Rosenberg & Gala,
1985). For instance, a woman might think of herself in terms of
various social roles (lawyer, friend, mother), kinds of relationships (colleague, competitor, nurturer), types of activities (running, playing tennis, writing), superordinate traits (hard-working, creative), goals (career success), and so forth. Each role,
relationship, activity, goal, and superordinate trait in the selfrepresentation may serve as a self-aspect, each with its own set
of features, propositions, and affects. These self-aspects are assumed to be structures in a larger associative network. Not all

The Spillover Process
Self-complexity is important because it partially determines
the impact of experiences on thoughts and feelings about various self-aspects. When people experience a negative event, the
self-aspect most relevant to the immediate context is activated,
and negative thoughts and feelings evoked by the experience
tend to become associated with the activated self-aspect For
instance, a tennis player who has just lost an important match
is likely to feel dejected. These negative feelings are likely to
become associated with this person's "tennis player" self-aspect, as are negative thoughts or inferences evoked by the defeat
(e.g., "I performed poorly under pressure"). Likewise, experiencing a positive event triggers positive thoughts and feelings
that become associated with activated self-aspects.
The model further assumes that activation spreads from the
originally activated self-aspect to associated self-aspects. A selfaspect will become activated to the degree that it is related to
currently activated self-aspects. Feelings and inferences associated with the originally activated self-aspect spill over and color
feelings and inferences regarding associated self-aspects. For instance, if our tennis player is a courtroom lawyer by profession,
her "tennis player" and "courtroom lawyer" self-aspects may be
closely related because both are highly competitive and stressful
activities. Thus, defeat on the tennis court may spill over to lead
her to conclude, "Competition brings out the worst in me,"
which will make her feel worse about herself as a lawyer as well.
The more related two self-aspects are, the more likely thoughts
and feelings about one are to spill over to color thoughts and
feelings about the other.
Because greater self-complexity involves having self-aspects
that are more distinct from one another, people greater in selfcomplexity are likely to be less subject to such spillover effects.
For those high in self-complexity, thoughts and feelings evoked
by events are likely to be confined to immediately salient selfaspects. Thus, with greater self-complexity, fewer self-aspects
are affected by events, and a greater number of self-aspects remain unaffected.

Self-Complexity

and Affective

Extremity

The self-complexity model assumes that current affect is a

self-aspects are activated at any given time. Rather, specific self-

function of the affect associated with recently activated self-aspects. These recently activated self-aspects include not only

aspects are activated depending on such factors as the context
and associated thoughts, their relation to currently activated

those activated by recent events, but also those activated by the
spillover process or by other cognitive processes such as recall-

self-aspects, and their recency and frequency of activation.

ing past experiences.

Self-representations may differ in terms of both the number
of self-aspects and the degree to which distinctions are made
among self-aspects. Two self-aspects are distinct to the extent to
which they are represented by different cognitive elements. For
instance, if each self-aspect is represented by a set of features

Thus, the model leads to the self-complexity-qffeaive
extremity hypothesis: People lower in self-complexity will experience greater swings in affect and self-appraisal in response to
life events (Linville, 1985). That is, those lower in self-complexity will experience a more negative change in affect and self-

665

SELF-COMPLEXITY, ILLNESS, AND DEPRESSION

appraisal following a negative event and a more positive change
in affect and self-appraisal following a positive event.
Why does high self-complexity lead to less affective extremity? The greater a person's self-complexity, the smaller the proportion of self-aspects that are likely to be affected by an emotionally salient event This is true for two reasons. First, the
greater a person's self-complexity, the more self-aspects the person is likely to have. Thus, if an event directly affects only one
self-aspect, this one self-aspect will be a smaller proportion of
the total self-representation for a person high in self-complexity.
Second, because greater self-complexity implies less spillover,
the impact of emotionally salient events is less likely to spread
from the immediately affected self-aspect to other self-aspects.
Why does the proportion of self-aspects affected influence
affective extremity? Because emotionally salient events affect
a smaller proportion of the self-aspects of those high in selfcomplexity, the direct impact of the event will tend to be relatively small. In addition, those high in self-complexity will tend
to have a greater proportion of self-aspects that were unaffected
by the event. Thus, if these unaffected self-aspects are activated
by other events or cognitions, they may serve to moderate the
impact of the original event.'
The self-complexity-affective extremity prediction has been
supported in two past experiments. In the first, Linville (1985)
examined reactions to success and failure in a bogus performance feedback experiment. As predicted by the self-complexity model, those lower in self-complexity showed both a greater
increase in affect and self-appraisal following a success experience and a greater decrease in affect and self-appraisal following
a failure experience. Thus, low self-complexity was associated
with more extreme affective reactions.
The second experiment tested a related prediction. Assuming
that people tend to experience both positive and negative selfrelevant events over time, the self-complexity model predicts
that those lower in self-complexity will experience greater mood
swings over time. Their mood will go up more after positive
events and down more after negative events, which results in
greater mood variability over time. Linville (1985) tested this
hypothesis in a mood diary study in which subjects filled out a
set of mood scales each day over a 2-week period. As predicted,
those lower in self-complexity displayed greater mood variability. Self-complexity was related to the variance but not to the
mean of subjects' mood scores over the 2-week period. Thus
subjects lower in self-complexity were not more positive or
more negative in their mood, they were simply more variable.

Self-Complexity as a Buffer Against Stress-Related
Illness and Depression
The goal of the current research is to extend the self-complexity model to physical and mental health consequences of stressful life events. One plausible sequence is as follows. Experiencing negative stressful events triggers negative thoughts and feelings associated with various self-aspects. These, in turn,
contribute to negative affect, low self-appraisal, depression, and
other stress reactions including physiological responses. These
may ultimately influence physical health outcomes through
neuroendocrine or immune system functioning, maladaptive

health-related behaviors (e.g., smoking, alcohol and drug use,
poor diet), and failure to seek medical care (see Jemmott &
Locke, 1984;Krantz,Grunberg,&Baum, 1985).
For people high in self-complexity, the impact of a stressful
event will tend to be confined to immediately relevant self-aspects, thus affecting a relatively small part of their self-representation and leaving many other self-aspects to serve as buffers
against the stressful event. In this way, greater self-complexity
moderates negative thoughts and feelings about self-aspects
and, hence, the extremity of negative affect and self-appraisal.
Assuming that these negative thoughts and feelings contribute
to stress reactions and their physical and mental health consequences, it follows that greater self-complexity also moderates
these adverse consequences of stress.
This logic leads to the self-complexity buffering hypothesis:
Greater self-complexity moderates the adverse impact of stressful events on physical and mental health outcomes.
The study that follows tests this prediction.
Method

Overview
The self-complexity buffering hypothesis was tested in a prospective
study that examined the relation between accumulated stresses and subsequent depression and illness in a college population. In Session 1, subjects completed a self-complexity task, then completed questionnaires
that assessed their life events, illnesses, and physical and depressive
symptoms occurring during the preceding 2 weeks. In Session 2, conducted 2 weeks later, subjects again reported on their life events, illnesses, and physical and depressive symptoms that had occurred during
the preceding 2 weeks. The self-complexity model predicts that those
greater in self-complexity are less prone to depression and illness following high levels of stress.

Subjects
A total of 106 undergraduates (43 men and 63 women; 58 freshmen
and 48 upperclassmen) participated in this study as pan of their research participation requirement.2 Subjects were tested in small groups
composed of 1 to 5 subjects.

Measures
Subjects attended two sessions, 2 weeks apart. (A 2-week time interval
was chosen because the outcomes studied have short developmental periods.) At each session, they completed the following measures.
Self-complexity measure- Recall that in the present model, self-com-

1
This is a probabilistic argument. On the average, the affect associated with unaffected self-aspects will be more moderate than that associated with self-aspects that have just been affected by emotionally salient
events. For example, there is no guarantee that a person will feel good
about a self-aspect unaffected by a negative event. But the more unaffected self-aspects a person has, the greater the chance that the person
will have positive feelings about some of them.
2
Three of the initial 109 subjects could not be scheduled for the second session. Because inclusion of sex as a variable did not alter any
results that tested self-complexity as a buffer against depression and illness, male and female subjects were combined in the present data analy-

666

PATRICIA W. L1NVILLE

plenty is conceptually defined in terms of the number and distinctiveness of self-aspects a person uses to think about himself or herself. To
measure self-complexity defined in this way, I used the self-complexity
sorting task developed in studies of mood variability and reactions to
success and Mure (Linville, 1985).
Subjects were given a packet of 33 randomly ordered index cards, 10
blank cards, and two recording sheets (each consisting of a legal-size
sheet with 14 columns}. Each index card contained the name of one
feature and a number in the corner.9 The features were chosen from a
pretest, open-ended self-description task. They were chosen to represent
a wide range of dimensions that students use to think about themselves
and included both positive and negative features. The experimenter gave
the following instructions aloud:
In this study we are interested in how you describe yourself. In
front of you are 33 cards and two recording sheets. I'D let you look
through the cards when I finish giving the instructions. Each card
contains the name of a trait or characteristic. Your task is to form
groups of traits that go together, where each group of traits describes an aspect of you or your life. You may sort the traits into
groups on any meaningful basis—but remember to think about
yourself while doing this. Each group of traits might represent a
different aspect of yourself. Form as many or as few groups as you
desire. Continue forming groups until you feel that you have
formed the important ones. I realize that this task could be endless,
but we want only what you feel is meaningful to you. When you
feel that you are straining to form more groups, it is probably a
good time to stop.
Each group may contain as few or as many traits as you wish.
You do no! have to use every trait, only those that you feel are descriptive of you. Also, each trait may be used in more than one
group; so you may keep reusing traits as many times as you like.
For example, you may find that you want to use the trait relaxed
in several groups. If you wish to use a trait in more than one group,
you may use one of these blank cards on your desk. Simply write
the trait and its number on a blank card and then proceed to use it
as you would the other cards.
The sheet with the columns is your recording sheet. Use the recording sheet to indicate which traits you have put together. Each
column will correspond to one of your groups. Notice the number
in the comer of each card. Write only the trait's number in the
column, not the name of the trait. In each column, place the numbers of the traits that form a group. A natural way to perform this
task is to form one or several groups and record them, then mix up
the cards and see if there are other groups that you wish to form
and then record them. Repeat this procedure until you feel that
you have formed the groups that are important to you. Remember
to use the blank cards if you wish to use the same trait in more
than one group. You have an extra recording sheet if you need it.
The order in which you record the groups is not important, nor is
the order of the traits within a group. We are only interested in
which traits you put together. It is not necessary to label the groups
unless you wish to. Do not put your name on the recording sheet,
'four responses are strictly anonymous and confidential. So be as
honest as you can.
As you are doing the task, I'd like you to keep a few things in
mind. Remember that you are describing yourself in this task, not
people in general. \bu do not have to use all of the traits, and you
may reuse a trait in several groups. Take as much time as you like
on the task. Different people will finish at different times, so take
as much time as you need even if others finish. Do you nave any
questions about the task? Now look at each of the traits and let me
know if you need a clarification on the meaning of any trait. When
you are finished, please turn over your recording sheet.
If subjects did not complete the task in 25 min, they were asked to do
so within the next 5 min. Because some subjects tend to stop when oth-

ers complete the task, no more than 5 subjects were tested at one time,
and subjects were tested in individual cubicles.
In general, subjects found the self-complexity sorting task meaningful
and interesting. All formed at least several groups, often reusing the
same feature in several different groups. Table 1 displays the actual feature sorts created by 2 subjects. These subjects spontaneously labeled
their feature groupings. An informal examination of these feature sorts,
as well as those of other subjects who labeled their feature sorts, supported several of our earlier speculations about the self. The self is multifaceted. It includes categories related to roles (student, friend), relationships (listener), activities (sports, parties), supernrdinate traits (tense,
creative), and evaluatively organized aspects (my best qualities).
To assign each subject a self-complexity score, I used a measure of
dimensionality based on the H statistic, an index of dispersion derived
from information theory (Attneave, 1959; Scott, 1969). The measure
represents the number of independent attributes implicit in a subject's
feature sort. In the present context, the objects in question were features
that described different aspects of the self, so I will refer to this measure
as the self-complexity score and denote it by the letters SC. It is defined
by

SC = logan -

(1)

where n is the total number of features (here 33), and n is the number
of features that appear in a particular group combination.4 The SC
score can be interpreted as the minimal number of independent binary
attributes underlying a person's feature sort about the self,' The greater
the number of self-aspects created and the less redundant the features
used in creating these self-aspects, the greater the SC score. Thus, high
self-complexity results from having a large number of self-aspects that
are nonredundant in terms of the features that describe them. Low selfcomplexity results either from having few self-aspects or from having
many self-aspects that are highly redundant in terms of the features that
describe them.
Activities. Subjects listed "the bask activities that you engage in during the school year" (e.g., studying, a job, sports, campus groups, dates,
relationships with others, artistic or musical activities, hobbies). Subjects listed each activity on a separate line. A simple count of the number of separate activities was later made. This count excluded such basic
activities as sleeping or eating.
Life stresses. Subjects completed a modified version of the College
Student Life Events Scale (CSLES; Levine & Perkins, 1980). The 102
items of the CSL£S represent stressful events that fall into 14 categories
(social and academic life, living arrangements, finances, drugs, religious
activities, political activities, sexual activities, family, friends, male-female relationships, employment, legal problems, accidents, and extracurricular activities). The scale was chosen because it includes a wide
variety of minor and major stressful events characteristic of a college-

3
The features and details of the measurement procedure are available
from the author.
4
To define a group combination, consider a feature that is sorted in
Group 1 and Group 2 but no others. This feature is said to fall into the
group combination 1-2. More generally, if a person forms two groups,
a given feature may fall into one of four possible group combinations:
1,2, 1-2, or no group. The «j in the formula would be interpreted as
follows in this example: nt = number of features sorted only into Group
I; HZ = number of features sorted only into Group 2; »3 = number of
features sorted only into both Group 1 and Group 2; and fi* - number
of features not sorted into any group. Note that if the Mh group combination has no members (i.e., n = 0), it is excluded from the summation.
5
The measure does not require the assumption that people think
about themselves in terms of independent binary attributes. It is simply
a useful statistical measure of the complexity of a feature sort.

667

SELF-COMPLEXITY, ILLNESS, AND DEPRESSION

TaWel
Examples of Two Subjects' Feature Sorts
Subject 1
Relationship
with men

Relationship
with friends

Relationship
with family

Outgoing
Playful
Reflective
Mature
Emotional
Assertive
Competitive
Relaxed
Humorous
Affectionate
Soft-hearted
Individualistic
Sophisticated

Humorous
Relaxed
Assertive
Outgoing
Mature
Emotional
Reflective
Soft-hearted
Not studious
Affectionate
Individualistic

Emotional
Playful
Reflective
Mature
Assertive
Humorous
Outgoing
Individualistic
Unconventional

Studies

Physically

Quiet
Studious
Organized
Mature
Reserved
Industrious
individualistic

Individualistic
Affectionate
Industrious
Quiet
Organized

At
patties

Humorous
Playful
Outgoing
Sophisticated
Affectionate
Competitive
Imaginative
Impulsive
Mature

Subject 2

Dorm life

Home life

School

Social life

Playful
Relaxed
Outgoing
Assertive
Competitive
Affectionate
Humorous
Soft-hearted
Unorganized
Lazy
Imaginative
Individualistic

Lazy
Emotional
Relaxed
Humorous
Playful
Affectionate
Unorganized
Soft-hearted
Not studious
Irresponsible

Reflective
Reserved
Unorganized
Lazy
Insecure

Outgoing
Humorous
Quiet
Relaxed
Playful
Insecure
Impulsive
Not studious
Conformist

age population. Because several of our outcome variables were illness
related, we omitted 7 health-related items from all analyses.'
For each item, subjects indicated whether the event is question had
happened to them during the past 2 weeks, during the past 6 months
(excluding the past 2 weeks), or not at all. For those events that had
occurred, subjects rated whether the impact of the event was negative,
mate, or positive, then whether the event was earned by you or not
caused by you. (The causal question and several life events were added
to the scale for mis study.)
Preliminary analyses were performed to select a stress index, in these
analyses, various stress indices at Time 1 were used to predict outcome
variables at Time 2. (These regression models did not include self-complexity as a predictor of Time 2 outcomes.) On the basis of these results,
the primary analyses reported here were based on a stress index computed for each subject using the number of negative events occurring
during the past 2 weeks.7
Subjects completed the following outcome measures at each of the
two sessions.
Depression, The Center for Epidemiologic Studies Depression Scale
(CES-D) consists of 20 items constructed to measure current level of
depressive symptomatology, especially depressive affect. Each symptom
on the CES-D was rated on a 4-point scale indicating the degree of occurrence during the previous week. The scale ranged from rarely or
none of the time to most all of the time (Radloff, 1977)."
Physical symptoms. The Cohen-Hoberman Inventory of Physical

Work
(dining hall worker)
Industrious
Rebellious
Playful
Outgoing
Assertive
Relaxed

Activities
Imaginative
Relaxed
Quiet
Outgoing
Assertive
Unorganized
Affectionate
Soft-hearted

Symptoms (CHIPS; Cohen & Hoberrnan, 1983) lists 39 common physical symptoms that reflect the health problems of college students (e.g.,
a cold, cough, pulled muscle, study head or nose, stomach pains, nausea, and headache). The scale excludes symptoms obviously psychological in nature. Subjects rated how much each physical symptom both-

6

Additional analyses revealed that inclusion of the health items did
not alter any results,
7
These analyses indicated that stresses during the past 2 weeks were
more strongly related to all subsequent depression and illness outcome
variables than stresses during the past 6 months. Similarly, an index of
events whose impact was perceived to be negative was more strongly
related to most outcome variables than an index of all events. Comparisons between a stress index based on an negative events during the past
2 weeks and one based on negative events during the past 2 weeks perceived to be "caused by you" showed no clear pattern of superiority in
predicting outcome variables. Because results for these two indices were
very similar, and because most stress research has used indices of an
negative events regardless of perceived causality, the primary analyses
reported here used a stress index based on all negative events during the
past 2 weeks.
* Because many subjects failed to notice that half of the items on a
Beck Depression Inventory were on the back side of the form, this variable was not included in the analyses.

668

PATRICIA W. UNVILLE

ered them during the past 2 weeks. Physical symptoms were rated on a
5-point scale (not at all, a little kit, moderately, quite a bit, extremely).
Illness. Subjects also listed, on a separate sheet, an illnesses that had
occurred in the past 2 weeks. The list of illnesses was later coded for the
occurrence of the following: (a) respiratory flu, (b) abdominal problems, (c) headache or backache, (d) allergy-related problems, (e) physical injury or muscle problems, (f) menstrual cramps, and (g) yeast infection. All listed illnesses fell into one of these categories. Those categories relevant only to women (menstrual cramps and yeast infection)
were analyzed for women only.
Perceived stress. Subjects completed the Perceived Stress Scale (PSS),
a 14-item instrument designed to measure the degree to which, situations ia one's life are appraised as stressful (Cohen, Kamarck, & Mermelstein, 1983). For each item, subjects rated how often during the past
2 weeks they thought or felt a certain way. For example, "In the last two
weeks, how often have you felt difficulties were piling up so high that
you could not overcome them?" Subjects responded on a 5-point scale
(never, almost never, sometimes, fairly often, very often).

3. hi >, =, or < 0: The model being tested makes no prediction concerning any direct association between self-complexity and level of depression and illness over time.
4.64 < 0: This is the key hypothesis of the self-complexity model. The
predicted multiplicative interaction provides a direct test of the selfcomplexity buffering hypothesis. If higher self-complexity moderates
the impact of recent stresses on subsequent depression and illness, then
the coefficient for the Self-Complexity X Stress interaction term will be
negative. That is, as self-complexity increases, the impact of stress on
illness and depression decreases.
Note that this is a prospective prediction model. By measuring outcome variables at both Time 1 and Time 2,1 was able to control for
initial levels of depression and illness. This prospective design also permits an examination of the temporal relation between life events and
depression and illness and avoids the contamination of measures that
occurs with retrospective studies. Thus, this prospective design provides
a strong test of the self-complexity model.
Results

Procedure
Self-Complexity
The study involved two sessions. Subjects were tested in individual
cubicles in groups of 1 to 5 persons. At the beginning of the first session,
the experimenter stressed the confidentiality and anonymity of their
responses. Subjects gave no identifying information but created a code
to be put on each scale. At the first session, subjects completed the selfcomplexity sorting task. They then completed a packet containing the
fallowing instruments in the following order the CSLES, the CES-D, tie
CHIPS, the PSS, and a sheet requesting a list of all illnesses occurring
during die past 2 weeks. Exactly 2 weeks later, subjects returned for
the second session. Subjects completed the same self-complexity sorting
task and the same packet of instruments. In addition, subjects listed
their school-year activities. Thus, in this prospective design, subjects
reported life stresses, depression, and illnesses for the past 2 weeks at
both Time 1 and again at Time 2 (2 weeks later).

Scores

As a 6rst step in the analyses, each subject received a SC score
based on his or her feature sort at Time 1 (see Equation 1). A
higher SC score indicates higher self-complexity. The maximum value of SC is logjn (where n is the number of features to
be sorted). In the present study, n = 33, so the maximum SC
score is Iofc33 = 5.04. The actual range of scores was between
.994 and 4.802 (M = 3.089, SO = .693).10 Self-complexity
scores for male and female subjects did not significantly differ
(/KM = 1.25, p > .2). Self-complexity was relatively stable from
Time 1 to Time 2 (r = .7, p < ,001). Also, a simple regression
analysis indicated that changes in self-complexity from Time 1
to Time 2 were not a function of life events (p = .9).
The number of feature groups created in the self-complexity
sorting task ranged from 3 to 12 (M = 6.57, SD = 2.156). Self-

Statistical Model and Predictions

complexity scores were positively correlated with number of
Recall that the model predicts a stress-buffering effect of self-complexity. The impact of stress on depression and illness is reduced as the
level of self-complexity increases. Because self-complexity was conceptualized and measured here and in prior studies as a continuous variable, I tested this prediction by using a multiple regression model that
included the multiplicative interaction of stress and self-complexity:

feature groups created (r = .72, p < .001). The number of activities listed ranged from 4 to 22 (M = 10.48, SD = 3.95). Both
self-complexity scores and number of feature groups created
had a near-zero correlation with number of activities.

Frequency of Stressful Events, Depression, and Illness
At Time 1,96% of the subjects reported at least one negative
X Stressi . (2)

event during the preceding 2 weeks. The number of negative
events ranged from 0 to 17 (M = 4.89, SD = 3.56). At Time 2,

Here, X2 is the value of the outcome variable (e.g.. depression, illness)
at Time 2; Y, is the value of the outcome variable at Time 1; Stress, is
the number of negative events during the past two weeks at Time 1;*
SC\ is the self-complexity score at Time 1; and SC, X Stress, is the
multiplicative interaction term that provides the basis for testing the
self-complexity buffering hypothesis.
Because all outcome variables are scaled so that higher scores indicate
greater depression or illness, the specific predictions of the analysis are
as follows:
1 . i| > 0: Because physical and mental health symptoms tend to persist, values of the outcome variables should be positively related over
time. This term controls for initial individual differences in illness and
depression.
2.frz> 0: Higher stresses at Time 1 will increase depression and illness
at Time 2.

67% of the subjects reported at least one type of illness during
the preceding 2 weeks (57% had respiratory flu, 19% had headaches or backaches, 13% had abdominal problems, 11% had
injuries, 3% had allergies, 11% of the women had menstrual
cramps, and 3% of the women had yeast infections). At Time 2,
depression (CES-D) scores ranged from 2 to 45 (M = 16.08),

' Additional regression analyses revealed that using a stress index
based on negative events during the past 2 weeks perceived to be "caused
by you" did not alter any of the results regarding the buffering effect of
self-complexity.
10
In prior studies that also used 33 traits, the mean self-complexity
scores for this sorting task were 2.857 and 3.555 (Linvule, 1985).

SELF-COMPLEXITY, ILLNESS, AND DEPRESSION
Table 2
Correlations Between Stresses, Self-Complexity, Physical
Symptoms, Depression, and Perceived Stress
Variable

Stress (Tl)

Self-complexity (Tl)
Physical symptoms (Tl)
Depression (Tl)
Perceived stress (Tl)
Self-complexity (T2)
Physical symptoms (T2)
Depression (T2)
Perceived stress (T2)

.12

Self-Complexity (Tl)

.30"
.28"
.31"

.17
.10
.09

.07

.70"»
.28"

.25"
.22"
.31"

.18
.15

Note. Stress = number of negative events. T l ' Time I. T2 = Time 2.
•pz .05. **ps .01. *"p<: .001.

physical symptoms (CHIPS) scores ranged from 0 to 81 (M =
18.45), and perceived stress (PSS) scores ranged from 8 to 45
(M =22.75).
Correlations
Correlations between key continuous variables are presented
in Table 2. Note first that self-complexity was not associated
with number of negative events. Second, number of negative
events at Time 1 was only moderately associated with depression, physical symptoms, and perceived stress at Time 2. This
weak association when moderators were not considered is consistent with previous research. Third, self-complexity at Time
1 was not significantly associated with level of depression, physical symptoms, or perceived stress at Time 1, although it was
moderately associated with physical symptoms at Time 2.
Fourth, although not shown, the Time 1 to Time 2 correlations
were .82 for physical symptoms, .56 for depression, and .75 for
perceived stress. Finally, although not shown in Table 2, depression, physical symptoms, and perceived stress were significantly
correlated with one another at both Time 1 and Time 2. These
correlations ranged from .45 to .80.
Regression Models of Physical Symptoms, Depression,
and Perceived Stress
Because of the complex and interactive nature of the model
posited in this article, the simple correlations discussed earlier
do not provide an adequate basis for testing the hypotheses of
interest. In this section, we will consider regression results obtained by estimating the coefficients of Equation 2 for each of
the three continuous outcome variables: physical symptoms,
depression, and perceived stress. Predictions regarding the signs
of the coefficients of these regression models were explained in
the previous discussion of Equation 2. The regression results
are summarized in Table 3, which presents standardized regression coefficients for each outcome variable." These regression
models explained between 35% and 71% of the variance in
Time 2 outcomes for the three continuous dependent variables.12
Additive effects of previous symptoms and stressful events. As

669

predicted, there was a strong positive relation between symptoms at Time 1 and symptoms at Time 2 for all three outcome
variables. The standardized i, coefficients for the three butcome variables ranged in size from .53 to .78, and each was
highly significant (p < .001). Even after adjusting for the effects
of stress and self-complexity, there was a large and statistically
significant tendency for physical symptoms, depression, and
perceived stress to persist over time.
Also as predicted, negative events at Time 1 were positively
and significantly related to physical symptoms, depression, and
perceived stress at Time 2. The standardized Aj coefficients,
which reflect the additive effect of stressful events, ranged in size
from .59 to .81. Thus, even after adjusting for prior symptom
levels and the effect of self-complexity, subjects who reported a
higher number of negative events at Time 1 displayed higher
levels of physical symptoms, depression, and perceived stress at
Time 2.
Additive and interactive effects of self-complexity. The critical
prediction of the present theory is that the impact of negative
events on physical and depressive symptoms is reduced as level
of self-complexity increases. Therefore, bt, the coefficient for
the multiplicative interaction of self-complexity and negative
events, should be negative. This prediction was supported for
all three outcome variables, physical symptoms (p < .01), depression (p < .03), and perceived stress (p < .06), with standardized regression coefficients ranging from —.56 to —.82. It is
noteworthy that the standardized regression coefficients for this
predicted interaction effect were as large as the additive effects
of negative events per se. Thus, these results strongly support
the main buffering prediction of the self-complexity model;
namely, the higher the level of self-complexity, the less adverse
the impact of stressful events on physical and depressive symptoms.
Recall that the self-complexity model makes no prediction
about the value of 63, the coefficient that reflects the additive
impact of level of self-complexity. As Table 3 reveals, this effect
was positive, with coefficient values ranging from .23 to .35. To
understand this additive main effect, we must consider it in the
context of Equation 2. Considered together, the estimated values of b2,b-i, and 64 imply that there was a crossover interaction
between stress and self-complexity.13 Our regression estimates
imply that at low levels of stressful events, subjects low in selfcomplexity were less likely to experience physical symptoms,
depression, or perceived stress. But at high levels of stressful
events, subjects high in self-complexity were less likely to experience physical symptoms, depression, or perceived stress.

1}

Because the self-complexity model makes a dear a priori directional prediction for fci, 6;, and bt, one-tailed tests are most appropriate
for testing hypotheses regarding these coefficients; for 63, where no a
priori prediction is made, two-tailed tests are appropriate (Winer,
1971).
12
Differences in variance explained were due mainly to differences
on how much change occurred between Time 1 and Time 2. High R1
values occurred for dependent variables that changed very little because
the covariate at Time 1 accounted for most of the variance at Time 2.
1
* When the estimated regression relation was plotted, a crossover occurred in the range of the observed values of stress and self-complexity.

670

PATRICIA W. LINVILLE

Thus, higher self-complexity acted as a buffer against the adverse physical and mental health consequences of high levels of
stressful events. But in the absence of stressful events, low selfcomplexity subjects experienced fewer symptoms. As I argue in
the Discussion section, although such a crossover interaction is
not necessarily predicted by the self-complexity model, it is not
inconsistent with it
Logit Models of Probability of Illness
Our measures of the occurrence or nonoccurrence of specific
illnesses (e.g., flu or no flu) were dichotomous. This section reports the results of logit analyses for the five types of illnesses
that occurred in 10% or more of our sample at Time 2. These
were respiratory flu, backaches and headaches, menstrual
cramps, abdominal problems, and injuries.14 In addition, I created a dichotomous overall measure (illness) for the presence or
absence of any type of illness. Ordinary least squares regression
analysis is inappropriate for these dichotomous outcome variables. Instead, for each illness, the coefficients of the following
logit regression model were estimated:
logfftj/U - Pij)] = bo + b, Yt + biStress,

+ baSC, + WO, X Stressi. (3)
Here A, denotes the conditional probability that subject i will
have illness ji at Time 2, given the observed values of the independent variables for subject / (see Bishop, Fienberg, & Holland,
1975). Thus, the dependent variable in this model is the "log
odds" that subject / will get illness/ Predictions from the selfcomplexity model regarding the signs of the coefficients in
Equation 3 are exactly the same as for Equation 2,
The coefficients of Equation 3 were estimated by using the
logistic regression procedure in the BMDP package. A separate
logit model was estimated for each illness as well as for the overall illness measure. To facilitate comparisons of the relative sizes

Table 3

Standardized Regressions of Physical Symptoms,
Depression, and Perceived Stress
Independent variables

Outcome
variable
Physical
symptoms
(T2)
Depression
(T2)
Perceived
stress (T2)

<*i)

Stress
(Tl)
(W

SC
(Tl)
(W

.78***

.61"

.53"*
.71"*

Outcome
(Tl)

SC(T1)X
Stress
(Tl)

(W

R2

.34"*

-.68"*

.71

.81"

.35"

-.82"

.35

.59"

.23"

-.56*

.58

Note. Tl - Time 1. T2 = Time 2. SC - self-complexity. N = 106. The
SC x Stress interaction term provides the basis for testing the buffering
hypothesis.
*ps .06.
.05. ***p s .01.

Table 4
Logit Models of Illness
Independent variables

Outcome
variable
Illness (T2)
Flu(T2)
Aches (T2)
Cramps (T2)
Abdominal (T2)
Injury (T2)

Outcome
(Tl)

0.53*
0.60"
0.87"
-4.26
1.02"
1.39"

Stress
(Tl)

2.95"
2.64"
2.74*
5.52*
1.46
1.09

SC(T1)

SC(T1)X
Stress
(Tl)

(As)

(*4)

1.26*
1.19"
1.08*
1.98*
0.49
0.91

-3.34"
-3.21"
-2.43*
-6.12*
-1.31
-1.11

Note. Tl = Time 1. T2 - Time 2. SC = self-complexity. JV= 106 for all
illness variables except cramps (women only) where N = 63. The Stress,
SC, and SC X Stress variables have been converted to standardized
scores. The binary illness, flu, aches, cramps, abdominal, and injury
variables have been left in binary form.

of coefficients for Table 4, the continuous independent variables
(stress, self-complexity, and the Self-Complexity x Stress interaction) were standardized by converting them to Z scores. But
the values of the illness outcome variables at Time 1 and Time
2 were left in their naturally dichotomous form. Logit results
for each illness measure are presented in Table 4.
Additive effects of previous symptoms and stress. For all types
of illnesses except menstrual cramps, the presence of the illness
at Time 1 was positively and significantly related to the presence
of that illness at Time 2. Thus, except for menstrual cramps,
the presence or absence of these illnesses tended to persist over
a 2-week period of time. Of greater interest is the fact that the
i>2 coefficients were also positive and statistically significant for
four of the six illness measures. Even after controlling for the
presence of illness at Time 1, negative events at Time 1 were
positively associated with the presence of illness at Time 2 for
the illness, flu, aches, and cramps measures. Negative events at
Time ( were not significantly associated with the abdominal 01
injury measures at Time 2 (see Table 4).
Additive and interactive effects of self-complexity Here the
critical prediction of the self-complexity model is that i>4, the
coefficient for the Self-Complexity X Stress interaction, is negative. In discussing the results of this prediction, it is useful to
distinguish between those illness outcome measures at Time 2
that were significantly associated with stress at Time 1 and those
that were not. If a specific illness is unrelated to prior stress,
then moderating the stress should not reduce the likelihood of
the illness. Thus, the types of illnesses for which we expect a
significant Self-Complexity x Stress interaction are those
whose occurrence is associated with prior stress.
For all four illness outcome variables for which there was a
significant stress main effect, the coefficient for the Serf-Complexity X Stress interaction was negative and statistically sig-

" Allergies and yeast infections occurred too infrequently (3%) to
permit us to meaningfully estimate the coefficients in Equation 3.

671

SELF-COMPLEXITY, ILLNESS, AND DEPRESSION
nificant as predicted (illness, p < ,Q04;flu, p < .005; aches, p <

Discussion

.05; and cramps, p < .03). Moreover, comparison of the b2 and
2>4 coefficients revealed that the interaction effect was of roughly

The proposed model predicts that people who have complex

the same magnitude as the adverse effect of stress per se (see
Table 4). So here, too, we find support for the self-complexity

self-representations are less vulnerable to the adverse physical
and mental health consequences of stressful events. The model

buffering prediction that those high in self-complexity are less

maintains that self-knowledge is cognitively represented in

prone to stress-related illness following a period of high stress.

terms of multiple self-aspects that vary in terms of their related-

For the two illness outcome variables for which there was no
significant stress main effect (i.e., abdominal and injury), the
coefficient for the Self-Complexity X Stress interaction was not

ness. As defined in this model, greater self-complexity involves
having more self-aspects and perceiving greater distinctions
among self-aspects. When people experience negative events,

significant. However, these symptom categories occurred for

they experience negative thoughts and feelings associated with

relatively few subjects in our experiment (13% had abdominal

particular self-aspects. These negative thoughts and feelings
then spill over and color thoughts and feelings about associated

problems and 11% had injuries), so these tests of the self-complexity buffering hypothesis had low statistical power. Moreover,
even for these two variables, the coefficients for the stress main
effect were positive, and the coefficients for the Self-Complex-

self-aspects. Because people high in self-complexity tend to

ity X Stress interaction were negative as predicted by the model.
Therefore, even for these variables, the results were consistent

be confined to a smaller proportion of their self-representation.

with the self-complexity model (although not statistically significant).

self-aspects that can serve as buffers to moderate negative
thoughts and feelings resulting from negative events. If one as-

Finally, as was the case for the continuous outcome variables,
the 63 coefficients for the additive effect of self-complexity were
positive for all six illness measures and statistically significant

sumes that such negative thoughts and feelings about various
self-aspects contribute to stress reactions and their physical and

for four. Again, this indicates a crossover interaction between

should be less prone to these adverse consequences of stress.

stress and self-complexity. Our logit results imply that at low

The results of this prospective study support the self-complexity buffering hypothesis and suggest the following conclu-

levels of stress, subjects lower in self-complexity were less likely
to become ill. But at high levels of stress, subjects higher in selfcomplexity were less likely to become ill.
In summary, greater self-complexity acted as a protective
buffer against the adverse physical and mental health consequences of stressful events. Subjects higher in self-complexity
were less prone to depression, perceived stress, physical symptoms, and occurrence of the flu and other illnesses following
high levels of stressful events.

have more self-aspects, and because they are less likely to experience spillover effects, the impact of a negative event is likely to
Thus, those high in self-complexity will have more unaffected

mental health consequences, those higher in self-complexity

sions. First, greater self-complexity acts as a moderator of depression and illness when people are under high stress. Second,
greater self-complexity buffers against those types of health outcomes that are related to stress in the current sample (respiratory flu, backaches and headaches, and menstrual cramps).
Third, self-complexity is a stronger moderator of stress-related
depression and illness than a simple count of number of selfaspects or number of activities.
The analyses tested whether self-complexity is related to wellbeing through a main effect model (i.e., self-complexity has a

Other Measures of Self-Complexity
To see whether two relatively crude measures of self-complexity would also serve as predictors of differences in reactions to
stress, two additional sets of regression analyses were run that
paralleled those already reported. In the first set of analyses, a

beneficial effect regardless of whether people are under stress)
or a buffering model (i.e., self-complexity moderates the adverse
effect of stressful events and, therefore, is beneficial primarily
for those under stress). The self-complexity model does not imply that those higher in self-complexity will generally display
higher levels of physical and mental health but, rather, that self-

simple count of the number of feature groups created by each

complexity interacts with level of stress so that those higher in

subject in the serf-complexity sorting task was used as a self-

self-complexity will be less adversely affected by negative events

complexity measure in Equations 2 and 3. Results for this mea-

when they occur. Thus, the model predicts a buffering interac-

sure revealed the same buffering pattern as those based on the

tion but makes no predictions regarding either a positive or neg-

SC score used in the main analyses, but the interaction effect

ative main effect of self-complexity. The current data supported

was weaker and nonsignificant. Number of feature groups cre-

this buffering prediction. High self-complexity was mainly ben-

ated is an inferior measure of self-complexity because unlike
the self-complexity statistic defined earlier, it fails to adjust for

eficial to those under high stress. Similarly, many studies have

the redundancy of the categories created.

high levels of stress (see Cohen & Wills, 1985; Gentry & Ko-

shown that social support is beneficial primarily to those under

In the second set of analyses, the number of activities listed

basa, 1984, for reviews). In past studies, self-complexity moder-

by each subject was used as a self-complexity measure. Results

ated mood and self-appraisal but had no main effect on mood

for this measure showed no buffering effect of number of activi-

or self-appraisal (Linvffle, 1985).
In fact, estimation results from the regression analysis re-

ties on physical or mental health outcomes of stress. In fact,
there was a nonsignificant tendency in the opposite direction: A
greater number of activities tended to exacerbate the relation
between stress and subsequent depression and illness.

vealed a crossover interaction between stress and self-complexity. At low levels of stress, subjects lower in self-complexity
showed fewer physical and mental health symptoms than did

672

PATRICIA W. LINVILLE

those higher in self-complexity. At higher levels of stress, sub-

support, but at high levels of stress, subjects high in social sup-

jects higher in self-complexity showed fewer adverse symptoms.
Although such a crossover interaction is not necessarily pre-

port reported fewer symptoms than did those low in social support. Cohen and Hoberman speculated that the relationships

dicted by the self-complexity model, it is not inconsistent
with it.

background stress. Similarly, at low levels of stress, Cohen and

that provide social support may also be a source of low-level

Why might low self-complexity be advantageous at low levels

Hoberman found a slight tendency for subjects with more posi-

of stressful events? One possibility is that the absence of nega-

tive events to experience more physical symptoms; however, at

tive events may be interpreted or experienced as a positive state

high levels of stress, more positive events acted as a buffer.

of affairs. If so, then the crossover interaction observed here
could be another instance of the self-complexity-affective extremity effect reported in Linville's previous research on the

Alternative Explanations for the Buffering
of Self-Complexity

Effect

effects of positive and negative performance feedback (LinviUe,
1985).13 In this work, LinviUe found that subjects lower in self-

The prospective nature of the present design allows us to rule

complexity showed greater decline in affect and self-appraisal

out reverse causation arguments. For instance, it is possible that

following negative performance feedback, but they also showed

the presence of physical or depressive symptoms might cause

greater rise in affect and self-appraisal following positive feed-

both high reported levels of stressful events and low self-com-

back. If one assumes that the absence of negative events is experienced as a positive state of affairs, then the self-complexityaffective extremity hypothesis suggests that in the absence of

plexity. Thus, people with high symptom levels would also have
high stress scores and low self-complexity scores, as predicted

stressful events, those low in self-complexity may experience
more positive affect than those high in self-complexity. If positive affect protects against depression and illness, then those low

to rule out in a cross-sectional study. But the present prospective design directly controlled for symptoms at Time 1, which

in self-complexity may experience fewer mental and physical

self-complexity and stress at Time 1 and symptoms at Time 2.
We can also rule out three response-bias explanations for the

health problems during periods of low stress.
A second possible explanation of the crossover interaction is

by our model. This is a plausible hypothesis that would be hard

removed any effects of prior symptoms on the relation between

observed buffering effect of self-complexity. The first is that
people higher in self-complexity simply report more of every-

that high self-complexity per se might be associated with types
of stress not captured by measures of the number of negative
events. For instance, maintaining multiple distinct self-aspects

thing (including more self-aspects), but under conditions of

may be a source of chronic, low-level stress, perhaps because of
role conflicts or multiple demands on time and attention. Such

scales. That is, because they displayed more symptoms under
low stress, subjects were unable to report many more symptoms
under high stress because they had already exhausted the scale

chronic stress may go unreported in events scales either because
it is a constant feature of the subject's life, or because it does
not fit into the framework of the events scales. Unfortunately,
we lack a direct measure of low-level stress resulting from role
strain. However, if one assumes that such stress is captured by
the PSS, then we can indirectly test this hypothesis by estimating the coefficients of the regression equation

high stress, they encounter a ceiling effect on the symptom

range. This would create the appearance of a moderating interaction like the one observed. However, examination of the actual distribution of responses on the physical symptoms, perceived stress, and depression scales revealed that even the most
extreme subjects could have gone much higher on each scale.16
Thus, the ceiling hypothesis is ruled out Moreover, those higher

(4)

in self-complexity did not report significantly more negative
events, and under stressful conditions, they actually reported
less depression, perceived stress, and illness than did those lower

If this speculation is correct, and if the PSS measure does cap-

in self-complexity. Thus, this first response-bias hypothesis is
refuted by the data.

PSS = b0 + ^Stress + b2SC.

ture role strain effects, then hi should be greater than zero. That

A second response-bias hypothesis is that people higher in

is, after we partial out the effects of specific stressful events,
there should be some residual perceived stress that is attribut-

self-complexity simply give more socially desirable responses.
Inconsistent with this explanation is the fact that under low

able to self-complexity per se. The estimation results for this
regression indicated that £3 was positive, but it was small and

more physical and depressive symptoms—a tendency that does

fell far short of traditional significance levels (p > .5). Neverthe-

not appear to be socially desirable. If one argues that those

less, this hypothesis is worthy of further study because the per-

higher in self-complexity tried to please the experimenter by

stress, subjects higher in self-complexity actually experienced

ceived stress measure may not capture the kinds of low-level
role strains that may accompany having a large number of distinct self-aspects.
It is noteworthy that other buffering studies have found crossover interactions (see Cohen & Wills, 1985, for a review). For
example, Cohen and Hoberman (1983) found a similar crossover interaction in their study of the protective effects of social
support At low levels of stress, subjects high in social support
reported more physical symptoms than did those low in social

i5
The complexity-extremity effect has also been demonstrated in
studies of how people perceive and evaluate members of various social
groups based on age, race, and sex (Linville, 1982; LinviUe & Jones,
1980).
15
Although the possible range of scores on the physical symptoms
scale was 0 to 140, the actual range was 0 to 81. The possible range for
the CES-D was 0 to 60, and the actual range was 2 to 45. The possible
range for the PSS was 0 to 56, and the actual range was 8 to 45.

673

SELF-COMPLEXITY, ILLNESS, AND DEPRESSION
reporting symptoms even in the absence of stress, they should

only the hypotheses to which they lead. Other sets of assump-

also have reported more symptoms under high stress, which

tions could be devised that would lead to the same hypotheses.

they did not.

Current work is testing and refining these assumptions regard-

A third response-bias hypothesis is that the results reflect

ing the mechanisms that underlie the self-complexity model.

only a general propensity to use or avoid extreme values on a
rating scale, possibly because people adopt different anchors for
the endpoints of scales. Contrary to this hypothesis, the selfcomplexity measure itself was based on a feature-sorting task,

Implications for Testing the Self-Complexity

Model

not on a rating task. Thus, the measure of self-complexity could
not have been affected by such a response bias. Moreover, the

The results have several implications for the measurement of
self-complexity. First, the SC score used in the primary analyses

outcome variables illness, flu, aches, and cramps were gener-

was a better predictor of illness and depression than was a sim-

ated by listing illnesses, not by rating scales. The supportive

ple count of the number of feature groups created by the subject

results for these discrete outcome variables cannot be ac-

in the self-complexity sorting task. This finding supports an im-

counted for by a tendency to use extreme values on a rating
scale.
A final type of alternative explanation for the buffering effect

portant element of the theoretical interpretation of the selfcomplexity concept, namely that self-complexity depends not
only on the number of self-aspects but also on the extent to

of self-complexity involves differential interpretation of life
events by those high in self-complexity or high in depression or

which these self-aspects are related to one another. The SC
score reflects both components of self-complexity, whereas a

illness. To test this hypothesis, the coefficients of the following

simple count of feature groups created reflects only number of

regression model were estimated:

where PNEG is the proportion of reported events judged by the

self-aspects.
Second, the SC score was a better predictor of illness and depression than was a simple count of the number of activities
reported by subjects. Sociological research suggests that multi-

PNEG = ba + b,SC + b2Yi + b}SC X Yit

(5)

subject to have had a negative impact, SC is the subject's self-

ple roles can have a protective effect against the adverse effects

complexity score, Y-, is the subject's score on the i-th illness or
depression measure (either CES-D, CHIPS, or PSS), and SC X Y{
is the product interaction of self-complexity and the i-th illness

of stress. Thoits (1983b) has shown that the greater the number

or depression measure. If either self-complexity, level of illness

distress. In addition, people who hold fewer social roles—the
unmarried, the unemployed, the retired, housewives, those who
live alone—experience more psychological distress than their

or depression, or their interaction influenced whether subjects
interpreted events negatively, then one or more of the coefficients in this regression equation should be statistically significant. Three versions of this model were estimated, one for each
of the three continuous outcome measures. In all three analyses,
the coefficients of all independent variables were very small and

of actual social identities possessed (e.g., spouse, parent, friend,
church member), the lower the reported level of psychological

counterparts who hold more roles (e.g., Gove & Hughes, 1980;
Gove & Tudor, 1973; Gurin, Veroff, & Feld, 1960; Radloff,
1975). Verbrugge (1983) has shown that employment, marriage, and parenthood are associated with good health for both

port for the hypothesis that the findings were due to differential

men and women. Employed married parents had the best
health, and people with none of these roles had the worst health.

interpretation of events by those high in self-complexity, de-

The present results suggest that a simple count of number of

pression, illness, or perceived stress.

social roles may not completely account for stress reactions, and
that the concerns of classic role theory may be expanded by
considering two additional questions: First, how are roles cogni-

far from statistically significant (p > .7). Thus, there is no sup-

Limitations of the Present Study

tively represented? Second, how are they cognitively related to

Because this research deals with potentially important theo-

one another? The cognitive relatedness of roles may be as

retical and clinical issues, it is essential to recognize possible
limitations of the work. First, the reported test of the model was
limited to an undergraduate population. Current work is testing

closely related to health as the number or kind of roles.
Third, the research suggests that self-complexity is best con-

the model in nonstudent populations. Second, the study re-

ceived of as a continuous variable, a matter of degree, rather
than an all-or-nothing factor. Treating self-complexity as a di-

ported here used a stress measure based on the accumulation

chotomous (high vs. low) measure provides a less powerful test

of a variety of types of events judged to have a negative impact.

of the model. In the present study, treating the SC score as a

To see whether these results generalize across different ways of
measuring stress, current work is examining the response of a

dichotomous variable supported the buffering hypothesis, but
the effect was weaker.

population of respondents, all of whom have been exposed to

Fourth, the present approach to measuring self-complexity,

the same stressful event. A third note of caution concerns the
status of the assumptions underlying the self-complexity model

via the self-complexity sorting task and the SC score, is closely
linked to the conceptual definition of self-complexity in the

developed in this article. The approach has been to present one

model developed here. To test the present self-complexity

set of assumptions that leads to the present hypotheses. The
assumptions are plausible and, as noted in the discussion of
them, most are based on previous research findings. But the

model, it is important to use a self-complexity measure that
satisfies this conceptual definition of self-complexity. Other intuitively plausible definitions or measures of self-complexity

assumptions themselves were not tested in the present research,

will not necessarily show the same relation to the extremity of

674

PATRICIA W. LINVILLE

affective reactions or to the likelihood of physical and mental
health symptoms following stressful events.
The theoretical model and results also have two implications
for the design of tests of the self-complexity model. First, the
results underscore the advantages of using a prospective design
to test buffering hypotheses. As noted earlier, the prospective
design rules out several alternative explanations of the findings.
In addition, a prospective design provides a more powerful statistical test of the buffering hypothesis. When 62, fe3, and b, in
Equation 2 were estimated using only cross-sectional data at
Time 1, the results were generally consistent with the self-complexity buffering hypothesis, but they were weaker than the prospective results and statistically significant in only a few cases.
The greater power of the prospective design results from using
the Time 1 score for the outcome variable as a covariate to factor out individual differences and thus increase the precision
with which other effects are estimated.
Second, the discussion of the predictions regarding the coefficients of Equation 2, particularly bt, the coefficient for the
multiplicative interaction of stress and self-complexity, underscores the importance of including a measure of stressful events
in tests of the self-complexity buffering hypothesis. Simply correlating self-complexity with symptom levels does not test the
buffering hypothesis. Rather, one needs to examine the interaction effect of stress and self-complexity to determine whether
greater self-complexity buffers those under high stress.

Implications for the Concept of Self
Although the notion of self-concept has long been of interest
to psychologists, most earlier work focused on the content
rather than the structural properties of the self. The present
model is consistent with the growing interest in how information about the self is cognitivety represented and processed (e.g.,
Bower & Gilligan, 1979; Carver &Scheiei; 1981;Greenwald&
Pratkanis, 1984; Higgins et a!., 1985; Kihlstrom & Cantor,
1983; Markus, 1977; Rogers, 1981). The present view is that
representations of self are best conceived of in terms of multiple
self-aspects, or multiple cognitive structures, each with its own
set of associations among features, propositions, affects, and
evaluations. Some self-aspects are highly interconnected to
other self-aspects, whereas others are not. In the present model,
events do not activate all self-aspects or the self-concept as a
whole. Rather, only a subset of self-aspects is activated at any
given time. Specific self-aspects are activated, depending on the
context, the thoughts involved, their relation to currently activated self-aspects, their recency and frequency of activation,
their chronic accessibility (Higgins et al., 1982), and motivation. This is consistent with McGuire's work showing that
different features of the self are salient at different times. People
tend to focus on their features that are most distinctive in a
particular social environment (e.g., McGuire, McGuire, Child,
& Fujioka, 1978; McGuire & Padawer-Singer, 1976). Thus, how
we feel or think about ourselves is dependent on which selfaspects are currently salient or activated. This multifaceted
view of the self is in contrast to theories that implicitly assume
that the self is represented and activated as a unitary cognitive
structure.

How do self-representations develop over time into more
differentiated structures? First, increased experience in varied
roles, relationships, and situations increases the opportunity for
self-differentiation. This argument is consistent with theories of
cognitive development that imply that cognitive differentiation
increases with experience (Lewin, 1951; Piaget, 1960; Werner,
1957), and self-concept and self-evaluations become more
differentiated and more abstract with increasing age (Montemayor & Eisen, 1977; MuUener & Laird, 1971). The self becomes increasingly differentiated through the same basic cognitive processes of generalization and discrimination that lead to
increasing differentiation of other social knowledge structures
(e.g., Linville, Salovey, & Fischer, 1986). Second, an increasing
range of experiences relevant to the self (e.g., family, professional, social, aesthetic, physical) also creates functional incentives for self-differentiation. Increased self-differentiation provides a highly efficient way of accessing self-relevant information in a variety of areas of life, and of discriminating and
responding to the varied demands of an increasing number of
roles and interpersonal situations. Thus, greater self-complexity
is likely to be a function of both greater and more varied experiences and greater demands to differentiate among aspects of
one's life. For instance, number of cognitive self-aspects may
depend, in part, on the number of actual roles and relationships
in one's life. Thus, people involved in multiple personal and
professional roles may exhibit greater self-complexity than
those whose lives center on only a few roles. Third, intellectual
and personality tendencies may contribute to the tendency to
cognitively differentiate the self (Linville, Barnes, & Bersoff,
1986). Thus, holding the number of actual roles or relationships
constant, people may differ in their tendency to differentiate
self-representations.
Finally, note that the factors that contribute to greater selfcomplexity will not necessarily have any impact on the complexity of cognitive representations of other domains (e.g., cognitive representations of political figures or social psychologists). Thus, those high in self-complexity need not necessarily
be high in complexity with respect to other domains.

Clinical Implications
This initial work suggests several broader and potentially significant clinical implications of the self-complexity construct
and model. First, the self-complexity model developed here provides theoretical insight into the cognitive and affective responses to stress that result in adverse psychological and physical symptoms. Responses to life events are a consequence not
only of the cognitions and affect associated with the event-relevant self-aspect, but also of the cognitions and affect associated
with related self-aspects in the self-representation. Second, this
research suggests that the self-complexity sorting task and SC
score provide potentially useful diagnostic tools for identifying
those individuals who are more vulnerable to depression or illness under high stress. Third, the self-complexity model may
prove useful in understanding the negative thought patterns
characteristic of clinically depressed individuals. As argued in
an earlier article, the cycle of negative thoughts characteristic of
depression may derive from an automatic spreading activation

SELF-COMPLEXITY, ILLNESS, AND DEPRESSION
process in which negative thoughts about one self-aspect activate associated negative thoughts in related self-aspects (Linville, 198S). Finally, the self-complexity model suggests therapeutic interventions that simultaneously encourage people to
develop distinctions among self-aspects and to focus on those
self-aspects about which they have positive thoughts and feelings. For instance, people might be encouraged to focus on feeling good about themselves in certain respects despite problems
concerning other areas of their lives, for example, "Despite my
marital problems, I am a good parent."

References
Attneave, F. (1959). Applications of information theory to psychology.
New York: Holt-Dryden.
Beck, A. T. (1976). Cognitive therapy and the emotional disorders. New
York: International Universities Press.
Bishop, Y. M. M., Fienberg, S. E., & Holland, P. W. (1975). Discrete
multivariote analysis: Theory and practice. Cambridge: MIT Press.
Bower, G. H.. & Gffligan, S. G. (1979). Remembering information related to one's self. Journal of Research in Personality, 13,420-461.
Cantos N., & Kihbtrom, S. (1986). Personality and social intelligence.
Englewood CBS, NJ: Prentice-HalL
Carvei; C. S., & Sender, M. F. (1981). Attention and self-regulation: A
control theory approach to human behavior. New York: Springer-Verlag.
Cassel, J. C. (1976). The contribution of the social environment to host
resistance. American Journal of Epidemiology, 104,107-123.
Cobb, S. (1976). Social support as a moderator of life stress. Psychosomatic Medicine, 38,300-314.
Cohen, S., & Hobennan, H. M. (1983). Positive events and social supports as buffers of life change stress. Journal of Applied Social Psychology, 13,99-125.
Cohen, S., Kamarck, X, & Mermelstein, R. (1983). A global measure
of perceived stress. Journal of Health and Social Behavior, 24, 385396.
Cohen, S., & Wills, T. A. (1985). Stress, social support, and the buffering
hypothesis. Psychological Bulletin, 98, 310-357.
Dean, A., & lin, N. (1977). The stress-buffering role of social support.
Journal ofNerwus and Mental Health, 169,403-417.
Dohrenwend, B. S., & Dohrenwend, B. P. (1978). Some issues in research on stressful Hie events. Journal of Nervous and Menial Disease,
166,1-15.
Gentry, W. D., & Kobasa, S. C. (1984). Social and psychological resources mediating stress-illness relationships in humans. In W. D.
Gentry (Ed.), Handbook of behavioral medicine (pp. 87-116). New
\brfc Guflford Press.
Gergen, K. J. (1971). The concept of self. New \brk: Holt, Rinetmrt &
Winston.
Gove, W. S., & Hughes, M. (1980). Reexammmg the ecological fallacy:
A study in which aggregate data are critical in investigating the pathological effects of living alone. Social Forces, 58, 1157-1177.
Gove, W. S., & Tudor, 3. F. (1973). Adult sex roles and mental illness.
American Journal of Sociology, 78,50-73.
Greenwald, A. G., & Pratkanis, A. R. (1984). The self. In R. S. Wyer &
T.K.St:uU(Ete.),Ifandbookofsocialcognitian(V<A. 3, pp. 129-178).
Hillsdale, NJ: Eribaum.
Grain, G., Veroff, J., & Feld, S. (I960). Americans view their mental
health. New York: Basic Books.
Higgins, E. T, King, G. A., & Mavin, G. H. (1982). Individual construct
accessibility and subjective impressions and recall. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 43, 35-47.

675

Higgins, E. T, Klein, R., & Strauman, T. (1985). Self-concept discrepancy theory: A psychological model for distinguishing among different aspects of depression and anxiety. Social Cognition, 3, 51-76.
James, W. (1892). Psychology: The briefer course. New York: Holt,
Rinehart & Winston.
Jemmott, J. B., & Locke, S. E. (1984). Psychosocial factors, immunelogic mediation, and human susceptibility to infectious diseases: How
much (So vKtaiawt Psychological Bulletin, 95, 78-108.
Johnson, J. H., & Sarason, I. G. (1978). Life stress, depression, and
anxiety: Internal-external control as a moderator variable. Journal
of Psychosomatic Research, 22,205-208.
Kanner, A. D., Coyne, J. C., Shaefer, C., & Lazarus, R. S. (1980). Comparison of two modes of stress measurement: Daily hassles and uplifts
versus major life events. Journal of Behavioral Medicine, 4,1-39.
Kaplan, B. H., Cassel, J. C, & Gore, S, (1977). Social support and
health. Medical Care, IS, 47-58.
Kihlstrom, J. F., & Cantor, N. (1983). Mental representations of the self.
In L. Berkowitz (Ed.), Advances in experimental social psychology
(Vol. 17, pp. 1-47). New York: Academic Press.
Kobasa, S. C. (1979). Stressful life events, personality, and health: An
inquiry into hardiness. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology,
37,1-11.
Krantz, D. S., Grunberg, N. E, & Baum, A. (1985). Health psychology.
Annual Review of Psychology, 36,349-383.
Kuiper, N. A., & Derry, P. A. (1981). The self as a cognitive prototype:
An application to person perception and depression. In N. Cantor &
J. F. Kihlstrom (Eds.), Personality, cognition, and social interaction
(pp. 215-232). Hillsdale, NJ: Eribaum.
LaRocco, J. M., House, J. S., & French, J. R. P., Jr. (1980). Social support, occupational stress, and health. Journal of Health and Social
Behavior, 21,202-218.
Lazarus, R. S., & Launier, R. (1978). Stress-related transactions between persons and environment In L. A. Pervin & M. Lewis (Eds.),
Perspectives in interactional psychology (pp. 287-327). New "York:
Plenum Press.
Lefcourt, H. M. (1981). Locus of control and stressful life events. In
B. S. Dohrenwend & B. P. Dohrenwend (Eds.), Stressful life events
and their contexts. New York: Prodist.
Levine, M., & Perkins, D. V. (1980, August). Tailor making life events
scale. Paper presented at the meeting of the American Psychological
Association, Montreal.
Lewin, K. (1951). Field theory in social sciences. New York: Harper.
Linville, P. W. (1982). The complexity-extremity effect and age-based
stereotyping. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 42, 193211.
Linville, P. W. (1985). Self-complexity and affective extremity: Don't
put all of your eggs in one cognitive basket. Social Cognition, 3,94120.
Linville, P. W., Barnes, M., & Bersoff, D. M. (1986). Self-complexity: A
measure of multiple self-aspects. Unpublished manuscript, \ale University, New Haven, CT.
Linville, P. W., & Jones, E. E. (1980). Polarized appraisals of outgroup
members. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 38,689-703.
Linville, P. W., Salovey, P., & Fischer, G. W. (1986). Stereotyping and
perceived distributions of social characteristics. In J. Dovidio & S. L.
Gaertner (Eds.), Prejudice, discrimination, and racism (pp. 165208). New York: Academic Press.
Markus. H, (1977), Self-schemata and processing information about
the self. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 35,63-78.
Markus, H., & Nurius, P. (1986). Possible selves. American Psychologist, 41, 954-969.
McGuire, W. J., McGuire, C. W., Child, P., & Fujioka, T. (1978). Salience of ethnicity in the spontaneous self-concept as a function of

676

PATRICIA W. LINVILLE

one's ethnic distmctiveness in the social environment. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 36.511 -520.
McGuire, W. J., & Padawer-Singer, A. (1976). Trait salience in the spontaneous self-concept. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology,
33.743-754.
Montemayor, R., & Eisen, M. (1977). The development of self-conceptions from childhood to adolescence. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 34,314-319.
Mullen, B., & Suls, J. (1982). "Know thyself": Stressful life changes
and the ameliorative effect of private self-consciousness. Journal of
Experimental Social Psychology, IS, 43-55.
Mullener, N., & Laird, J. D. (1971). Some developmental changes in the
organization of self-evaluations. Developmental Psychology, 5, 233236.
Peariin, L. I., & Schooler C. (1978). The structure of coping. Journal
of Health and Social Behavior, 19,2-21.
Piaget, J. (1960). The psychology of intelligence. New %rfc Harcourt,
Brace.
Radloff, L. (1975). Sex differences in depression. Sex Roles, 1, 249265.
Radloff, L. (1977). The CES-D scale: A self-report depression scale for
research in the general population. Applied Psychosocial Measurement, 1,3^-401.
Rogers, T. B. (1981). A model of the self as an aspect of the human
information processing system. In N. Cantor £ J. F, Kihlstrom
(Eds.), Personality, cognition, and social interaction (pp. 193-214).
Hillsdale. NJ: Erlbaum.

Rosenberg, S., & Gala, M. A. (1985). The multiplicity of personal identity. In P. Shaver (Ed.), Review of personality and social psychology
(Vol. 6, pp. 87-113). Beverly Hills, CA: Sage.
Scott, W. A. (1969). Structure of natural cognitions. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 12,261-278.
Silver, R. L., & Wortman, C. B. (1980). Coping with undesirable life
events. In J. Garber & M. E. P. Seligman (Eds.), Human helplessness
(pp. 279-375). New York: Academic Press.
Taylor, S. E. (1983). Adjustment to threatening events: A theory of cognitive adaptation. American Psychologist, 38,1161-1173.
Thoits, P. A. (1983a). Dimensions of life events that influence psychological distress: An evaluation and synthesis of the literature. In H. B.
Kaplan (Ed.), Psychosocial stress (pp. 33-103). New York: Academic
Press.
Thoits, P. A. (1983b). Multiple identities and psychological well-being.
A reformulation and test of the social isolation hypothesis. American
Sociological Review, 48,174-187.
Verbrugge, L. M. (1983). Multiple roles and physical health of women
and men. Journal of Health and Social Behavior, 24, 16-30.
Werner, H. (1957). Comparativepsychology oj'mental development (3rd
ed.). New M>rk: International Universities Press.
Winer, B. J. (1971). Statistical principles in experimental design. New
Mjrk: McGraw-Hill.

Received March 31,1986
Revision received August 4,1986 •

Models of Addiction: Call for Papers
A special issue of the Journal of Abnormal Psychology is being planned that will
comprise both empirical research and review papers relevant to major models or conceptualizations of addiction. Solicited manuscripts should review empirical literatures, advance theory, or present major empirical data sets relevant to models or theories of addiction; namely, Pavlovian, opponent-process, operant, genetic, incentive,
biopharmacological, social learning, stress/coping models, and so on. Manuscripts
that have clear relevance to motivational processes in addiction are especially welcome. Thus, papers that address specific addiction phenomena (e.g., dispositional tolerance) should make clear the relevance of such phenomena to addiction theory and
drug motivation.
Contributions intended for the special issue should be sent to the guest editor
Timothy B. Baker
W. J. Brogden Psychology Building
University of Wisconsin
1202 West Johnson Street
Madison, Wisconsin 53706
The deadline for initial submission of manuscripts is May 10,1987. If authors desire
feedback regarding the general appropriateness of manuscripts in the preparation
stage, they should submit a 200-300 word abstract to the guest editor.

