Copyright 200i by the American Psychological Association, Inc.
0033-295X/01/$5.00 DO1: 10.1037//0033-295X.108.2.291

Psychological Review
2001, Vol. 108, No. 2. 291-310

Culture and Systems of Thought: Holistic Versus Analytic Cognition
Kaiping Peng

Richard E. Nisbett
University of Michigan

University of California, Berkeley

Incheol Choi

Ara Norenzayan
Ecole Polytechnique

Seoul National University

The authors find East Asians to be holistic, attending to the entire field and assigning causality to it,
making relatively little use of categories and formal logic, and relying on "dialectical" reasoning, whereas
Westerners are more analytic, paying attention primarily to the object and the categories to which it
belongs and using rules, including formal logic, to understand its behavior. The 2 types of cognitive
processes are embedded in different naive metaphysical systems and tacit epistemologies. The authors
speculate that the origin of these differences is traceable to markedly different social systems. The theory
and the evidence presented call into question long-held assumptions about basic cognitive processes and
even about the appropriateness of the process-content distinction.

adults. Work by Nisbett and his colleagues (Larrick, Nisbett, &
Morgan, 1993; Nisbett, 1993; Nisbett, Fong, Lehman, & Cheng,
1987; Smith, Langston, & Nisbett, 1992) shows that people can
learn statistical, probabilistic, methodological, logical, deontic,
cost-benefit, and other quite abstract rule systems and categorization procedures, and that training can affect their reasoning about
everyday life events and even their behavior. Significant effects
can be obtained not merely by extensive training in formal courses
but sometimes even by brief instruction in the laboratory. Given
that inferential rules and cognitive processes appear to be malleable even for adults within a given society, it should not be surprising if it turned out to be the case that members of markedly
different cultures, socialized from birth into different world views
and habits of thought, might differ even more dramatically in their
cognitive processes.
In this article, we argue that the considerable social differences
that exist among different cultures affect not only their beliefs
about specific aspects of the world but also (a) their naive metaphysical' systems at a deep level, (b) their tacit epistemologies,2
and (c) even the nature of their cognitive processes—the ways by
which they know the world. More specifically, we put forward the
following propositions, which we develop in more detail later.
1. Social organization directs attention to some aspects of the
field at the expense of others.
2. What is attended to influences metaphysics, that is, beliefs
about the nature of the world and about causality.
3. Metaphysics guides tacit epistemology, that is, beliefs about

The British empiricist philosophers of the 18th and 19th centuries, including Locke, Hume, and Mill, wrote about cognitive
processes as if they were the same for all normal adults. This
assumption of universality was adopted by mainstream psychology
of the 20th century, where it has been predominant from the
earliest treatment of cognitive psychology by Piaget, to midcentury learning theorists, to modem cognitive science. The assumption of universality was probably strengthened by the analogy
to the computer, which has been implicit and often explicit for the
past 30 years (Block, 1995; Shweder, 1991). Brain equals hardware, inferential rules and data processing procedures equal the
universal software, and output equals belief and behavior, which
can, of course, be radically different given the different inputs
possible for different individuals and groups. "Basic" processes
such as categorization, learning, inductive and deductive inference,
and causal reasoning are generally presumed to be the same among
all human groups.
It appears, however, that fairly marked differences in knowledge
about and use of inferential rules exist even among educated

Richard E. Nisbett, Department of Psychology, University of Michigan;
Kaiping Peng, Department of Psychology, University of California, Berkeley; Incheol Choi, Department of Psychology, Seoul National University,
Seoul. Korea; Ara Norenzayan, Centre de Recherche en Epistemologie
Appliquee, Ecole Polytechnique, Paris, France.
This research was supported by National Science Foundation Grant SBR
9729103 and National Institute on Aging Grant AG 15047. We appreciate
the criticism and advice of Dan Ames, Scott Atran, Patricia Cheng, Marion
Davis, Eric Knowles, Trey Hedden, Lawrence Hirschfeld, Lijun Ji, Beom
Jun Kim, Shinobu Kitayama, Ulrich Kuhnen, Jan Leu, David Liu, Geoffrey
Lloyd, Hazel Markus, Ramaswami Mahalingam, Taka Masuda, Coline
McConnell, Donald Munro, Denise Park, Winston Sieck, David Sherman,
Michael Shin, Edward E. Smith, Stephen Stich, Sanjay Srivastava, Timothy Wilson, and Frank Yates.
Correspondence concerning this article should be addressed to Richard
E. Nisbett, Department of Psychology, East Hall, University of Michigan,
Ann Arbor, Michigan 48109-1109. Electronic mail may be sent to
nisbett@umich.edu.

1

We use the philosopher's term metaphysics rather than ontology, which
is a more common term for psychologists to use to describe theories about
the nature of the world, because we wish to convey concerns with very
general notions about the nature of causality and reality, as well as the
relationships between substance and attribute, fact and value.
2
We use the term epistemology to refer to peoples' theory of knowledge,
including what counts as knowledge, the degree to which different kinds of
knowledge are certain, and the presumed relation between the knower and
the object that is known. This definition is probably congenial to both
psychologists and philosophers.

291

292

NISBETT, PENG, CHOI, AND NORENZAYAN

what it is important to know and how knowledge can be
obtained.
4. Epistemology dictates the development and application of
some cognitive processes at the expense of others.
5. Social organization and social practices can directly affect
the plausibility of metaphysical assumptions, such as
whether causality should be regarded as residing in the field
versus the object.
6. Social organization and social practices can influence directly the development and use of cognitive processes such
as dialectical versus logical ones.
First, we review evidence that we find to be a convincing
example of the contention that societies can differ markedly in
their systems of thought. This evidence concerns a comparison of
the societies, philosophical orientations, and scientific outlooks of
two highly sophisticated cultures: those of ancient China and
Greece. We summarize the views of many historians, philosophers
of science, and ethnographers indicating that the two societies
differed in marked ways both socially and cognitively, and that the
social and cognitive differences were related. We next present a
general proposal concerning the relation between social factors
and cognition based on an examination of social life and cognitive
procedures in the ancient world, deriving a number of quite specific predictions from that formulation. We then present a review
of evidence regarding these predictions that comes mostly from
our recent research comparing modern individuals raised in societies influenced by ancient Chinese thought with people raised in
societies influenced by ancient Greek thought. This research shows
that, to a remarkable extent, the social and cognitive differences
that scholars have reported about ancient China and Greece find
their counterparts among contemporary peoples. Moreover, these
are not mere parameter differences, but in many cases differences
that are quantitatively very large and even qualitatively distinct.
Finally, we speculate on the origins of differences in systems
of thought, sketch an analysis of the factors that might sustain
"sociocognitive homeostatic systems" over millennia, and present
a consideration of the implications of our findings for claims about
cognitive universality and for the traditional distinction between
cognitive content and cognitive process.

agency that had no counterpart among the other ancient civilizations. Indeed, one definition of happiness for the Greeks was "the
exercise of vital powers along lines of excellence in a life affording
them scope" (Hamilton, 1930/1973, p. 25). Though the Greeks
believed in the influence of the gods, "divine intervention and
independent human action" were seen to work together (Knox,
1990, p. 39). The daily lives of the Greeks were imbued with a
sense of choice and an absence of social constraint that were
unparalleled in the ancient world. "The idea of the Athenian state
was a union of individuals free to develop their own powers and
live in their own way, obedient only to the laws they passed
themselves and could criticize and change at will" (Hamilton,
p. 144).
Related to the Greek sense of personal freedom is their tradition
of debate, which was already well established at least by the time
of Homer in the 8th century (Galtung, 1981; Lloyd, 1990; Nakamura, 1964/1985). Homer emphasizes repeatedly that, next to
being a capable warrior, the most important skill for a man to have
was that of the debater. Even ordinary people participated in the
debate of the marketplace and the political assembly and could
challenge even a king (Cramer, 1993, p. 65).
An aspect of Greek civilization that had a great effect on
posterity was their sense of curiosity about the world and the
presumption that it could be understood by the discovery of rules
(Lloyd, 1991; Toulmin & Goodfield, 1961, p. 62). The Greeks
speculated about the nature of the objects and events around them
and created causal models of them. The construction of these
models was done by categorizing objects and events and generating rules about them for the purpose of systematic description,
prediction, and explanation. This characterized their advances in,
some have said invention of, the fields of physics, astronomy,
axiomatic geometry, formal logic, rational philosophy, natural
history, history, and ethnography. Whereas many great ancient
civilizations, including the earlier Mesopotamian and Egyptian and
the later Mayan, made systematic observations in many scientific
domains, only the Greeks attempted to model such observations in
terms of presumed underlying physical causes (Cromer, 1993;
Kane, 2000; Lin, 1936, p. 84; Toulmin & Goodfield, 1961).

The Ancient Chinese and Harmony
Ancient Greek and Chinese Society

From roughly the 8th to the 3rd century B.C., many civilizations
made great strides in philosophical and moral thought and in
scientific and technological endeavors, notably Persia, India, the
Middle East, China, and Greece. We will examine the differences
between the two civilizations that were most distant from one
another and probably influenced one another the least: those of
Greece and China. In addition, the influence each of these civilizations has had on the modern world is particularly great. Greek
civilization gave rise to European civilization and post-Columbian
American civilization, and Chinese civilization gave rise to the
civilizations of East Asia, including Japan and Korea, and also
greatly influenced Southeast Asia.
The Ancient Greeks and Personal Agency
One of the most remarkable characteristics of the ancient Greeks
flonians and Athenians in particular) was the location of power in
the individual. Ordinary people developed a sense of personal

The ancient Chinese provide a particularly valuable contrast to
the Greeks. The Chinese counterpart to the Greek sense of personal
agency was a sense of reciprocal social obligation or collective
agency. The Chinese felt that individuals are part of a closely knit
collectivity, whether a family or a village, and that the behavior of
the individual should be guided by the expectations of the group.
The chief moral system of China, Confucianism, was essentially
an elaboration of the obligations that obtained between emperor
and subject, parent and child, husband and wife, older brother and
younger brother, and between friend and friend. Chinese society
made the individual feel very much a part of a large, complex, and
generally benign social organism in which prescriptive role relations were a guide to ethical conduct (Lin, 1936; Munro, 1985).
Individual rights were construed as one's "share" of the rights of
the community as a whole. "[R]ole fulfillment in a hierarchical
system . .. [took] priority over most other goods" (Munro, p. 19).
Such an emphasis on collective agency resulted in the Chinese
valuing in-group harmony, "as when the occupants of a social
group . . . perform their functions and do not transgress the bound-

CULTURE AND THOUGHT

aries of duty or expectations that accompany those functions"
(Munro, 1985, pp. 20-21). Within the social group, any form of
confrontation, such as debate, was discouraged. Though there was
a time, called the period of the "hundred schools" of 600-200 B.C.,
during which debate, among philosophers at least, did occur
(Yang, 1988), "[t]here never developed a 'spirit of controversial
language' nor a 'tradition of free public debate' " (Becker, 1986, p.
78). "In philosophy, in medicine, and elsewhere there is criticism
of other points of view . . . [b]ut the Chinese generally conceded
far more readily than did the Greeks, that other opinions had
something to be said for them" (Lloyd, 1990, p. 550). So far from
debate being encouraged in a society with such values, one person
could not contradict another without fear of making an enemy
(Cromer, 1993, pp. 73-74), and to "be involved in a lawsuit was
ipso facto ignominious" (Lin, 1936).
Chinese civilization was technologically far advanced beyond
that of the Greeks. The Chinese have been credited with the
original or independent invention of irrigation systems, ink, porcelain, the magnetic compass, stirrups, the wheelbarrow, deep
drilling, the Pascal triangle, pound-locks on canals, fore-and-aft
sailing, watertight compartments, the sternpost rudder, the paddlewheel boat, quantitative cartography, immunization techniques,
astronomical observations of novae, seismographs, and acoustics
(Logan, 1986, p. 51). Many of these technological achievements
were in place at a time when the Greeks had none.
But most experts hold that these advances should not be regarded as the result of scientific theory and investigation (Cromer,
1993; Kane, 2000; Logan, 1986). Instead, they are reflective of a
Chinese genius for practicality (Nakamura, 1964/1985, p. 189). "In
Confucianism there was no thought of knowing that did not entail
some consequence for action" (Munro, 1969, p. 55; see also On,
1996). The Chinese did not make formal models of the natural
world but rather proceeded by intuition and empiricism. Indeed, it
has been maintained that the Chinese never developed a concept
corresponding to the laws of nature for the sufficient reason that
they did not have a concept of "nature" as distinct from human or
spiritual entities (Fung, 1983, p. 55; Lloyd, 1991; Logan, 1986, p.
50; Munro, 1969; Zhou, 1990).

Chinese and Greek Science, Mathematics, and Philosophy
The social-psychological aspects of ancient Greek and Chinese
life had correspondences in the systems of thought of the two
cultures. Their metaphysical beliefs were reflections of their social
existences. And their tacit epistemologies in turn seem to have
reflected their different metaphysical beliefs. These resulted in
very great differences between Greece and China in their approaches to scientific, mathematical, and philosophical questions.
The cognitive differences between ancient Chinese and Greeks
can be loosely grouped under the heading of holistic versus analytic thought (Nisbett, 1998; Peng & Nisbett, 1999). We define
holistic thought as involving an orientation to the context or field
as a whole, including attention to relationships between a focal
object and the field, and a preference for explaining and predicting
events on the basis of such relationships. Holistic approaches rely
on experience-based knowledge rather than on abstract logic and
are dialectical, meaning that there is an emphasis on change, a
recognition of contradiction and of the need for multiple perspectives, and a search for the "Middle Way" between opposing
propositions. We define analytic thought as involving detachment

293

of the object from its context, a tendency to focus on attributes of
the object to assign it to categories, and a preference for using rules
about the categories to explain and predict the object's behavior.
Inferences rest in part on the practice of decontextualizing structure from content, the use of formal logic, and avoidance of
contradiction.
The distinction between holistic and analytic thought rests on a
long tradition of theory about reasoning beginning with James and
Piaget and continuing to the present. Holistic thought is associative, and its computations reflect similarity and contiguity. Analytic thought recruits symbolic representational systems, and its
computations reflect rule structure. Sloman (1996) has recently
reviewed evidence for this distinction in the cognitive realm.
Witkin and his colleagues (Witkin, Dyk, Faterson, Goodenough, &
Karp, 1974; Witkin et al., 1954) have made a similar distinction in
the perceptual realm between "field dependence" and "field independence." Our definition encompasses both reasoning aspects and
perceptual aspects of the distinction as well as the belief systems
that underlie those differences.
Historians and philosophers of science have identified a number
of important differences between the Greeks and the Chinese that
fit under the definitions above.
Continuity versus discreteness. A fundamental intellectual difference between the Chinese and the Greeks was that the Chinese
held the "view that the world is a collection of overlapping and
interpenetrating stuffs or substances.. .. [This contrasts] with the
traditional Platonic philosophical picture of objects which are
understood as individuals or particulars which instantiate or 'have'
properties" (Hansen, 1983, p. 30) that are themselves universals
(e.g., "whiteness," "hardness"). This profound difference in metaphysics had many ramifications. Most fundamentally, the Greeks,
unlike the Chinese, were inclined to see the world as a collection
of discrete objects which could be categorized by reference to
some subset of universal properties that characterized the object.
Thus although the Greeks debated whether matter was best understood as waves or particles, the Chinese seem never to have had
any doubt about the continuous nature of matter (Needham, 1962,
p. 1).
Field versus object. Since the Chinese were oriented toward
continuities and relationships, the individual object was "not a
primary conceptual starting point" (Moser, 1996, p. 31). Instead,
"parts exist only within wholes, to which they have inseparable
relations" (Munro, 1985, p. 17). The Greeks, in contrast, were
inclined to focus primarily on the central object and its attributes
(Hansen, 1983, p. 31). This tendency likely contributed to the
Greeks' lack of understanding of the fundamental nature of causality in the physical domain. Aristotle explained a stone's falling
through the air as being due to the stone having the property of
"gravity" and explained a piece of wood's floating on the surface
of water as being due to the wood having the property of "levity."
The Chinese, in contrast, recognized that all events are due to the
operation of a field of forces. They had knowledge of magnetism
and acoustic resonance, for example, and knew the correct explanation for the behavior of the tides (Needham, 1962, p. 60).
Relationships and similarities versus categories and rules. A
consequence of their assumptions about continuity and the importance of the field is that the Chinese were concerned with relationships among objects and events (Zhang, 1985). In contrast, the
Greeks were more inclined to focus on the categories and rules that
would help them to understand the behavior of the object inde-

294

NISBETT, PENG, CHOI, AND NORENZAYAN

pendent of its context (Nakamura, 1964/1985, pp. 185-186). The
Chinese were convinced of the fundamental relatedness .of all
things and the consequent alteration of objects and events by the
context in which they were located. It is only the whole that exists;
and the parts are linked relationally, like "the ropes in a net"
(Munro, 1985). Thus any attempt to categorize objects with precision would not have seemed a terribly important epistemic goal
(Chan, 1967; Logan, 1986, p. 122; Moser, 1996, p. 116).3
The relationship view versus the rule stance is well illustrated by
the difference between the holistic approach to medicine characteristic of the Chinese and the effort to find effective rules and
treatment principles in the West. Surgery was common in the West
from a very early period because the idea that some part of the
body could be malfunctioning was a natural one to the analytic
mind. But the idea of surgery was "heretical to ancient Chinese
medical tradition, which taught that good health depended on the
balance and flow of natural forces throughout the body" (Hadingham, 1994, p. 77).
Dialectics versus foundational principles and logic. The Chinese seem not to have been motivated to seek first principles
underlying their mathematical procedures or scientific assumptions, and, except for the brief "Mohist" period from the end of the
4th to the end of the 3rd century B.C., "the Chinese did not develop
any forma) systems of logic for] anything like . . . an Aristotelian
syllogism" (Liu, 1974). Indeed, there was an absence "not only of
formal logical systems, but indeed of a principle of contradiction"
(Becker, 1986, p. 83). It is noteworthy that the Indians did have a
strong logical tradition, but the Chinese translations of their texts
were full of errors and misunderstandings (Becker, p. 84). It has
been argued that the lack of interest in logic accounts for why,
although Chinese advances in algebra and arithmetic were substantial, the Chinese made little progress in geometry where proofs
rely on formal logic, especially the notion of contradiction (Lloyd,
1990, p. 119; Logan, 1986, p. 48; Needham, 1962, p. 1). (Algebra
did not become deductive until the 12th century; Cromer, 1993,
p. 89.)
In place of logic, the Chinese developed a dialectic (Lloyd,
1990, p. 119), which involves reconciling, transcending, or even
accepting apparent contradictions. In the Chinese intellectual tradition, there is no necessary incompatibility between the belief that
A and not A both have merit. Indeed, in the spirit of the Tao or
yin-yang principle, A can actually imply that not A is also the
case—the opposite of a state of affairs can exist simultaneously
with the state of affairs itself (Chang, 1939; Mao, 1937/1962). It is
this belief that lies behind much of Chinese thought designed to
find the "Middle Way" between extremes—accepting that two
parties to a quarrel can both have right on their side or that two
opposing propositions can both contain some truth. The Chinese
dialectic includes notions resembling the Hegelian dialectic of
thesis-antithesis-synthesis and finds its counterpart in modern
"post-formal operations" in the Piagetian tradition—for example,
understanding of part-whole relations, reciprocal relations, contextual relativism, and self-modifying systems (Baltes & Staudinger,
1993; Basseches, 1984; Riegel, 1973).
Experience-based knowledge versus abstract analysis. "The
Chinese . . . sought intuitive instantaneous understanding through
direct perception" (Nakamura, 1964/1985, p. 171). This resulted in
a focus on particular instances and concrete cases in Chinese
thought (Fung. 1983: Lloyd, 1990; Nakamura, p. 171). Many
Greeks favored the epistemology of logic and abstract principles,

and many Greek philosophers, especially Plato and his followers,
actually viewed concrete perception and direct experiential knowledge as unreliable and incomplete at best, and downright misleading at worst. Thus they were prepared to reject the evidence of the
senses when it conflicted with reason (Lloyd, p. 118).
Ironically, important as the Greek discovery of formal logic was
for the development of science, it also impeded it in many ways.
After the 6th-century Ionian period, the empirical tradition in
Greek science was greatly weakened. It was countered by the
conviction on the part of many philosophers that it ought to be
possible to understand things through reason alone, without recourse to the senses (Logan, 1986, pp. 114-115). Importantly,
there never developed in Greece the critical concept of zero, which
is needed for an Arabic-style place number system as well as for
algebra. Zero was rejected as an impossibility on the grounds that
nonbeing is logically self-contradictory (Logan, p. 115)! Eventual
Western understanding of zero, infinity, and infinitesimals required a detour to the East.
Sociocognitive Systems
It is possible to derive the intellectual differences between the
ancient Greek and Chinese approaches to science and philosophy—their differing metaphysics and epistemology—from their
differing social psychological attributes. And, more generally, it is
possible to build a psychological theory from the historical evidence. We now return to the points sketched in the introduction
concerning the links from social organization to cognitive process.
We believe that social organization affects cognitive processes in
two basic ways: indirectly by focusing attention on different parts
of the environment and directly by making some kinds of social
communication patterns more acceptable than others.

From Attention to Cognitive Processes
Social organization, attention, and naive metaphysics. If one
lives in a complex social world with many role relations, one's
attention is likely to be directed outside oneself and toward the
social field. The Chinese habit of attending to the social environment might have carried over to the environment in general,
allowing, for example, for the discovery of the relevance of the
field in understanding physical events. As Markus and Kitayama
(1991) put it, "If one perceives oneself as embedded within a larger
context of which one is an interdependent part, it is likely that
other objects or events will be perceived in a similar way" (p. 246).
Attention to the field should foster attempts to understand relations
among objects and events in the field and should encourage
explanation of events in terms of the relationship between the
object and the field. Similarly, the world might naturally seem
continuous and interpenetrating to people who view themselves as
part of a larger whole and who are motivated to maintain harmony
within it.
On the other hand, if one lives in a world with fewer and less
significant social relations and role constraints, it may be possible
to attend primarily to the object and one's goals with respect to it.
The object's properties may thus be salient, and one may be
3

At any rate, the Chinese were not much interested in constructing
rigorous classifications of a sort that could make possible scientific rule
construction (Atran, 1995).

295

CULTURE AND THOUGHT

encouraged to use those properties to develop categories and rules
that presumably govern the object's behavior. The belief that one
knows the rules governing the object's behavior might encourage
exclusive focus on the object for explanation and might encourage
the belief that the world is a place that is controllable through one's
own actions. Moreover, the world is likely to be perceived as
discrete and discontinuous by those who regard themselves as fully
distinct and autonomous entities having limited connections to
others and possessing the ability to act autonomously.
Naive metaphysics and tacit epistemology. Beliefs about the
nature of the world can be expected to influence tacit epistemologies or beliefs about how to get knowledge. If the world is a place
where relations among objects and events are crucial in determining outcomes, then it will seem important to be able to see all the
important elements in the field, to see relations among objects, and
to see the relation between the parts and the whole. If the world is
a place where the behavior of objects is governed by rules and the
categories to which they apply, then it is crucial to be able to
isolate the object from its context, to infer category membership of
the object from its properties, and to infer how rules apply to
categories.
Tacit epistemology and cognitive processes. If it seems important to see relations in the field, then perceptual habits such as
deep processing of the environment and covariation-detection
skills could be expected to develop as well as cognitive habits such
as explaining events with reference to the field. If it is important to
find out the object's properties and the categories to which it
belongs, then perceptual habits such as decontextualization of the
object from the field and cognitive habits such as explaining the
object's behavior in terms of the categories and rules that apply to
it could be expected to develop. Such differential cognitive habits
would, of course, be expected to become largely automatic and
unconscious, just as the underlying naive epistemology would be
expected to be largely beyond the reach of conscious awareness.

epistemology, or epistemology governs the development of particular processes cannot, of course, be known at this time. This is
true in part because all of these elements are in homeostatic
balance, and there is reciprocal influence among all of them.
Despite this, it is fruitful to identify the kinds of social practices
that tend to be found in conjunction with particular cognitive
processes, and we will describe some important ones later. We will
also speculate about the ways that the social practices might
operate to sustain the cognitive processes.

Contemporary Cognitive

If the differences in the nature of social life between East and
West have been maintained, and if the original differences in
cognitive orientations were due to the social psychological Ones,
then cognitive differences might also be found today and not just
among the intelligentsia.
There is substantial evidence that the social psychological differences characteristic of ancient China and Greece do in fact
persist. China and other East Asian societies remain collectivist
and oriented toward the group, whereas America and other
European-influenced societies are more individualist in orientation.4 For reviews and general treatments of these differences,
see Bond (1996), Fiske, Kitayama, Markus, and Nisbett (1998),
Hofstede (1980), Hsu (1981), Markus and Kitayama (1991),
Nakamura (1964/1985), and Triandis (1972, 1995). As the psychologist L.-H. Chiu (1972) put it:
Chinese are situation-centered. They are obliged to be sensitive to
their environment. Americans are individual-centered. They expect
their environment to be sensitive to them. Thus, Chinese tend to
assume a passive attitude while Americans tend to possess an active
and conquering attitude in dealing with their environment, (p. 236)
[The American] orientation may inhibit the development of a tendency to perceive objects in the environmental context in terms of
relationships or interdependence. On the other hand, the Chinese child
learns very early to view the world as based on a network of relationships; he is socio-oriented, or situation-centered, (p. 241)

From Social Organization to Cognitive Processes
Social organization can influence cognitive processes without
mediation by metaphysical beliefs. Dialectics and logic can both
be seen as cognitive tools developed to deal with social conflict.
People whose social existence is based on harmony would not be
expected to develop a tradition of confrontation or debate. On the
contrary, their intellectual goals when confronted with a contradiction in views might be oriented toward resolving the contradiction, transcending it, or finding a "Middle Way"—in short, to
exercise a dialectical approach. In contrast, people who are free to
contend with their fellows might be expected to develop rules for
the conduct of debate, including the principle of noncontradiction
and formal logic (Becker, 1986; Cromer, 1993; Lloyd, 1990, pp.
8-9). Several commentators have maintained that the Greeks
brought to the pursuit of science essentially the same principles of
rhetoric that governed debate in the marketplace.
Science, in this view, is an extension of rhetoric. It was invented in
Greece, and only in Greece, because the Greek institution of the
public assembly attached great prestige to debating skill. . . . A geometric proof i s . . . the ultimate rhetorical form. (Cromer, 1993,
p. 144)

The exact psychological processes by which social organization
influences metaphysical beliefs, or metaphysical beliefs affect

Differences?

If the social differences have persisted, and if we are correct in
believing that social factors influence metaphysics, epistemology,
and ultimately cognitive processes, then several interrelated predictions can be made concerning cognitive differences between
4

We do not wish to imply that Eastern and Western* societies have been
marked continuously by the sorts of differences found in ancient times. The
West during the Middle Ages was similar economically and socially to
ancient China in many ways, and one would never characterize the feudal
period as being notably individualistic. In contrast, in various periods in
China, especially during the late 2nd century to the early 4th century A.D.,
there were substantial strains of individualism (Yu, 1985). It was probably
not until the late Medieval Period that the West began to return to levels of
individualism characteristic of ancient Greece. Since that time, however,
the West has continued on an ever more individualist trajectory while the
East in general has not. It is also important to note that there are marked
differences even today within both the societies that we are labeling
collectivist and those that we are labeling individualist. While acknowledging these differences, we agree with the mainstream view of historians,
ethnographers, sociologists, and cultural psychologists that there are nonetheless broad and deep differences between East and West with respect to
the collectivist-individualist dimension.

296

NISBETT, PENG, CHOI, AND NORENZAYAN

contemporary societies that have been influenced by China and
those that have been influenced by Greece.
Attention. We believe that attention to the social environment
is what underlay ancient Chinese attention to the field in general
and accounts in part for metaphysical beliefs such as their recognition of the principle of action at a distance. If this notion is
correct, we might find that contemporary Easterners and Westerners attend to different aspects of the environment. East Asians
would be expected to attend more to the field than European
Americans, who would be expected to attend more to a salient
target object. Process implications follow: East Asians should be
more accurate at covariation detection than Americans are, that is,
the perception of relationships within the field. East Asians should
also be more field dependent (Witkin, Dyk et al., 1974); that is,
they should find it more difficult than Americans to isolate and
analyze an object while ignoring the field in which it is embedded.
Control. If a belief in personal agency underlay Greek curiosity and the invention of science, then Americans might be
expected to perceive more control in a given situation than do East
Asians and to benefit more from being given control. They might
also be more subject to the illusion of control (Langer, 1975), that
is, a greater expectation of success when the self is involved in
interaction with the object—even when that interaction could not
logically have an effect on the outcome.
Explanation. If East Asians continue to have a metaphysical
commitment to the notion that the whole context is relevant for a
causal assessment of outcomes, we should find that their explanations of events invoke situational factors more frequently than do
those of Americans. East Asians would be expected to explain
events, both social and physical, with respect to the field—that is,
contexts and situations—more than Americans would, and Americans would be expected to explain events more with respect to a
target object and its properties. Thus Americans would be expected
to be more prone to the fundamental attribution error—the tendency to attribute behavior to dispositions of the person and to
slight the role of situations and contexts (Ross, 1977).
Prediction and "postdiction." We are proposing that East
Asians have always lived in a complex world in which many
relevant factors are important to a consideration of outcomes. Thus
their predictions about events might cast a wider net among
potential causal candidates. They might also be expected to be less
surprised by any given outcome because of their ready ability to
find some explanation for it in the complex of potentially relevant
factors. If explanations come to mind very easily for Asians, we
might find that they are more susceptible to hindsight bias, the
tendency to regard events as having been inevitable in retrospect
(Fischhoff, 1975).
Relationships and similarities versus rules and categories. If
Easterners are oriented toward the field, we would expect that they
would organize their worlds in terms of relationships among
events in the environment. More concretely, East Asians would be
expected to group objects and events on the basis of functional
relationships and part-whole relationships; for example, "A is a
part of B." Americans, in contrast, would be expected to group
objects more on the basis of category membership; for example,
"A and B are both Xs." Other predictions include the expectations
that Americans might learn rule-based categories more readily
than East Asians do and that Americans might rely more on
categories for purposes of deduction and induction.

Logic versus experiential knowledge. If the scant role played
by logic in the history of East Asian mathematics, science, and
philosophy has resonance in the thought processes of ordinary
people today, and if the sympathy for formal approaches remains
in the West, East Asians might be expected to rely more on prior
beliefs and experience-based strategies when evaluating the convincingness of formal arguments than do Americans. We might
also find that East Asians would be heavily influenced by prior
beliefs in judging the soundness of formal arguments. Americans
should be more capable of ignoring prior beliefs and setting aside
experience in favor of reasoning based on logical rules.
Dialectics versus the law of noncontradiction. If harmony
remains the watchword in social relations for East Asians, and if
social needs influence intellectual stances, East Asians would be
expected to seek compromise solutions to problems, to prefer
arguments based on principles of holism and continuity, and to try
to reconcile or transcend seeming contradictions. If the debater's
concern about contradiction continues to affect Western approaches to problems, Americans should be more inclined to reject
one or both of two propositions that could be construed as contradicting one another.
As we will see, there is support for each of these hypotheses. In
our review, we will not provide details about samples of participants in particular studies. Suffice it to say that we find supportive
evidence whether the East Asians studied are ethnic Chinese,
Koreans, or Japanese and whether they are living in their own
countries or living as foreign students at U.S. universities and
whether materials for East Asians are in English or translated into
their native languages. Though most of the participants in research
to date are students, there is also supportive evidence for nonstudents. It is entirely possible, of course, that there are significant
differences among the various East Asian populations with respect
to some of the issues we discuss. Certainly there are substantial
social and cultural differences, some of which might plausibly
affect cognitive processes. It should also be noted that the great
majority of people of European culture who have been studied are
Americans, and North Americans may well differ more from East
Asians than do Europeans or Latin Americans.

Attention and Control
Work by Meyer and Kieras and their colleagues (Meyer, 1995;
Meyer & Kieras, 1997a, 1997b, 1999) suggests that allocation of
attention is highly malleable and subject to learned strategic adjustments such that perceptual "bottlenecks" can be ameliorated.
Work by Rogoff and her colleagues (Chavajay & Rogoff, 2000;
Rogoff, Mistry, Goncii, & Mosier, 1993) indicates that people in
some cultures attend to a much wider range of events simultaneously than do people in other cultures. Thus East Asians might
be capable of attending to both the object and the field, and to a
wider range of objects in the field, than are Americans. We might
also expect that, if Westerners attend to the object more, and if
they believe that they understand the rules influencing the object's
behavior, they might have a greater belief in the controllability of
the object than is characteristic of Asians. Several implications
follow from these considerations: (a) Easterners should see wholes
where Westerners see parts; (b) Easterners should more easily see
relationships among elements in the field but (c) find it more
difficult to differentiate an object when it is embedded in the field;
and (d) Westerners' perceptions and behavior should be more

CULTURE AND THOUGHT

influenced by the belief that they have control over the object or
environment.
Holistic versus analytic Rorschach responses. In an early
study by Abel and Hsu (1949), Rorschach cards were presented to
European Americans and Chinese Americans. The investigators
found that their Chinese American participants were more likely
than their European American counterparts to give so-called
"whole-card" responses, in which all aspects of the card, or its
Gestalt as a whole, was the basis of the response. Their European
American participants were more likely to give "part" responses,
in which only a single aspect of the card was the basis of the
response.
Attention to the field. Masuda and Nisbett (2001) presented
realistic animated scenes of fish and other underwater objects to
Japanese and Americans and asked them to report what they had
seen. The first statement by American participants usually referred
to the focal fish ("there was what looked like a trout swimming to
the right"), whereas the first statement by Japanese participants
usually referred to background elements ("there was a lake or
pond"). Although Americans and Japanese were equally likely to
mention details about the focal fish, Japanese participants made
about 70% more statements about background aspects of the
environment. In addition, Japanese participants made about twice
as many statements concerning relations involving inanimate aspects of the environment ("the big fish swam past the gray seaweed"). In a subsequent recognition task, Japanese performance
was harmed by showing the focal fish with the wrong background,
indicating that the perception of the object had been "bound"
(Chalfonte & Johnson, 1996) to the field in which it had appeared.
In contrast, American recognition of the object was unaffected by
the wrong background.
A similar "binding" result was obtained by Hedden and his
colleagues (Hedden et al, 2000; Park, Nisbett, & Hedden, 1999).
They asked their Chinese and American participants to look at a
series of cards having a word printed either on a background of
social stimuli (e.g., people at a market) or on no background. The
words were unrelated to the pictures. Then participants were asked
to recall as many words as they could. Chinese, but not Americans,
recalled words better if they had been presented on the background, indicating that recall of the background served as a retrieval cue for the word for them.
Detection of covariation. Ji, Peng, and Nisbett (2000) examined ability to detect covariation among environmental stimuli.
Chinese and American participants were asked to judge the degree
of association between arbitrary figures. On the left side of a
computer screen, one of the two arbitrary figures was shown—for
example, a schematic medal or a schematic light bulb. Immediately following that, on the right of the screen, one of another two
figures was shown—for example, either a pointing finger or a
schematic coin. Actual covariation between figures on the left and
those on the right ranged from the equivalent of a correlation of .00
to one of .60. Chinese participants reported a greater degree of
covariation than did American participants and were more confident about their covariation judgments. Their confidence judgments were also better calibrated with actual covariation. In addition, as Yates and Curley (1996) found, American participants
showed a strong primacy effect, making predictions about future
covariations that were much more influenced by the first pairings
they had seen than by the overall degree of covariation to which
they had been exposed. Chinese participants, in contrast, showed

297

no primacy effect at all, making predictions about future covariation that were based on the overall covariation they had actually
seen.
Field dependence. Because of their habit of decontextualization and analysis, Americans should find it easier to separate an
object from the field in which it is embedded than should East
Asians. To examine this possibility, Ji and her colleagues (2000)
examined the performance of East Asians and Americans
(matched for SAT math score) on the Rod and Frame Test of
Witkin and his colleagues (Witkin et al., 1954). In this task, the
participant looks into a rectangular box framing a rod that sits
inside it. The task is to report when the rod appears to be vertical.
Field dependence is indicated by the degree to which judgments
about the position of the rod are influenced by the position of the
frame. Ji and colleagues found that East Asian participants made
more errors on the test than did American participants. East Asian
participants were also less confident about the accuracy of their
performance than were American participants.5
(Illusion of) control. It seems likely that if Americans believe
they have control over events, they might pay more attention to
them. Moreover, control is sufficiently important that people often
fail to distinguish between objectively controllable events and
uncontrollable ones. This "illusion of control" was defined by
Langer (1975) as being an expectancy of personal success higher
than the objective probability would warrant. The illusion of
control can actually result in improvement of some cognitive
functions for Americans. For example, participants were found to
perform better on routine tasks when they believed mistakenly that
they could control a loud noise that occurred periodically during
the tasks (Glass & Singer, 1973). Some cross-cultural work suggests that East Asians may not be so susceptible to this illusion.
Yamagushi, Gelfand, Miguno, and Zemba (1997) found that
American males were more optimistic in a condition in which they
had an illusion of personal control over the environment, whereas
American females and Japanese of both genders were not.
As these considerations would suggest, both the covariation
detection findings and the field dependence findings just discussed
were affected by manipulations intended to give participants a
sense of control. In one condition of the covariation-detection task,
participants were allowed to push a button to control which stimulus was presented on the left, and they could also control the
intertrial interval. Whereas this manipulation could have no effect
on the degree of covariation, Americans who were given "control"
in this fashion tended to see more covariation and express more
confidence in their judgments about covariation, whereas Chinese
5
Several studies compared the field dependence of East Asians and
Westerners using Witkin's Embedded Figures Test (EFT), in which a small
figure is shown to participants and they are then asked to find it in a larger,
more complicated figure. Typically no difference is found or a slight
difference is found favoring East Asians (Bagley, 1995; Huang & Chao,
1995). As Bagley has pointed out, however, this result is ambiguous,
because the figures used in the test resemble the characters in Chinese and
other East Asian writing systems. To examine if, indeed, writing systems
might be responsible for the lesser field dependence of East Asians examined using the EFT, Kiihnen, Hannover, Ro'der, et al. (2000) compared
various Western populations with Malaysians—a highly collectivist East
Asian population that, however, has a Latin writing system—and found the
Malaysians substantially more field dependent than any of the other three
groups.

298

NISBETT, PENG, CHOI, AND NORENZAYAN

participants showed the opposite tendencies. Moreover, control
actually impaired the calibration of Chinese judgments, whereas
this was not true for Americans. Similarly, in the Rod and Frame
task, when participants were allowed to control the movement of
the rod, the accuracy of American males improved whereas that of
the other groups did not. Finally, the confidence of both American
males and American females was greater when they had control
over the rod, and this was not true for East Asians of either gender.
Thus the attention of East Asians appears to be directed more
toward the field as a whole and that of Americans more toward the
object. East Asians found it easier to see relationships in the
environment but found more difficulty in separating object from
field. In addition, Americans and East Asians were affected quite
differently by control or the illusion of it: Americans' performance
improved and their confidence increased with control, whereas that
of East Asians did not.

Explanation and Prediction
It seems reasonable to assume that people attribute causality to
the events they attend to. If Westerners attend to the object, we
would expect them to attribute causality to the object. If East
Asians attend to the field and the object's relations with the field,
it seems likely that they would be more inclined to attribute
causality to context and situations. Each of these expectations is
supported by a substantial amount of evidence.

Dispositions Versus Contexts in Explanation
Causal attribution and prediction. One of the best established
findings in cognitive social psychology concerns the so-called
"correspondence bias" (Gilbert & Malone, 1995) or "fundamental
attribution error" (FAE; Ross, 1977)—the tendency to see behavior as a product of the actor's dispositions and to ignore important
situational determinants of the behavior. If it is really the case that
East Asians are more oriented toward contextual factors than are
European Americans, then we might expect that they would be less
subject to the FAE. I. Choi, Nisbett, and Norenzayan (1999;
Norenzayan, Choi, & Nisbett, 1999) have recently reviewed research supporting this contention.
Work by Miller (1984) initially suggested that the FAE might
indeed be more characteristic of Western culture than of other
cultures. She found that whereas Americans explained another
person's behavior predominantly in terms of traits, (e.g., recklessness or kindness), Hindu Indians explained comparable behaviors
in terms of social roles, obligations, the physical environment, and
other contextual factors. A similar demonstration by Morris and
Peng (Morris, Nisbett, & Peng, 1995; Morris & Peng, 1994)
showed that causal explanations by Americans of events such as
mass murders focused almost wholly on the presumed mental
instability and other negative dispositions of the murderers,
whereas accounts by Chinese of the same events speculated on
situational, contextual, and even societal factors that might have
been at work. Lee, Hallahan, and Herzog (1996) found that sports
editorial writers in Hong Kong focused on contextual explanations
of sports events, whereas American sports writers were more likely
to prefer explanations involving the dispositions of individual team
members. Norenzayan, Choi, and Nisbett (2001) found that Korean participants were more responsive to contextual factors when
making predictions about how people in general would be ex-

pected to behave in a given situation and, much more than did
American subjects, made use of their beliefs about situational
power when making predictions about the behavior of a particular
individual. Cha and Nam (1985) also found Koreans to make far
more use of situationally relevant information when making causal
attributions than Americans did.
Importantly, Norenzayan et al. (2001) found that Koreans and
Americans were able to articulate metatheories of behavior that
accorded with their explanations and predictions. Koreans endorsed situational and interactional theories more than did Americans. The East Asian focus on the field and the American focus on
the object can be apparent even when the East Asian attributions
are dispositional in nature. Menon, Morris, Chiu, and Hong (1999)
have found that East Asian dispositional explanations of events
(e.g., scandals in organizations) were more likely than those of
Americans to refer to group dispositions.
The different forms of preferred explanation apparently extend
beyond social events. Morris and Peng (1994) and Hong, Chiu, and
Kung (1997) showed participants cartoon displays of fish moving
in relation to one another in various ways. Chinese participants
were more likely to see the behavior of the individual fish as being
produced by external factors than Americans were, and American
participants were more inclined to see the behavior as being
produced by internal ones. Peng and Nisbett (2000) have shown
that the physical theories of contemporary Chinese and Americans
reflect those of their respective scientific predecessors two-and-ahalf millennia ago. For ambiguous physical events involving phenomena that appeared to be hydrodynamic, aerodynamic, or magnetic, Chinese were more likely to refer to the field when giving
explanations (e.g., "the ball is more buoyant than the water") than
Americans were. (For less ambiguous, lever and "billiard ball"
events, the explanations of Americans and Chinese were almost
identical.) Thus the attributional differences probably should not
be regarded as mere belief differences about local aspects of the
world, but rather as deep metaphysical differences not limited to
rules about particular domains specifically taught by the culture.
Attitude attribution paradigm. One of the first experimental
demonstrations of the fundamental attribution error was by Jones
and Harris (1967). Participants read an essay, either supporting or
opposing some position on an important social question of the day,
that allegedly had been written by another student. It was made
clear to participants in a "No Choice" condition that the target had
no choice about which side to take in the essay. For example, the
target had been required to write an essay in favor of Castro's
Cuba for a political science exam. Although normatively this
information might be expected to eliminate any assumption that
the essay reflected anything about the actual beliefs of the target,
participants who read the "Pro" essay reported believing that its
writer was probably much more in favor of the question than did
participants who read the "Con" essay.
I. Choi and Nisbett (I. Choi, 1998; I. Choi & Nisbett, 1998)
duplicated the basic conditions of the Jones and Harris study and
added a condition in which, before making judgments about the
target's attitude, participants were required to write an essay themselves and allowed no choice about which side to take. It was made
clear to participants that the target had been through the same
procedure they themselves had been. The American participants in
this condition made inferences about the target's attitude that were
as strong as those made by participants in the standard "No
Choice" condition. Korean participants, in contrast, made much

CULTURE AND THOUGHT

less extreme inferences than did Korean participants in the standard "No Choice" condition. Thus Korean participants, presumably by virtue of seeing the role that the situation played in their
own behavior, recognized its power and made attributions about
others accordingly. Similar sensitivity to situational constraints in
attitude attribution was obtained with Japanese participants by
Masuda and Kitayama (Kitayama & Masuda, 1997; Masuda,
1996).

Holistic Prediction and Postdiction
Attention to the field would appear to have clear advantages for
explanation of events, inasmuch as it allows for avoidance of the
fundamental attribution error. But attention to a broad range of
factors might mean that any event can be readily explained—
perhaps too readily explained. If a host of factors is attended to,
and if naive metaphysics and tacit epistemology support the view
that multiple, interactive factors are usually operative in a given
outcome, then any outcome may seem to be understandable, even
inevitable, after the fact. And indeed, I. Choi, Dalai, and KimPrieto (2000) have shown that Koreans regard a larger number of
factors as potentially relevant to explaining a given event. They
gave European American, Asian American, and Korean participants a detective story and listed a large number of facts. Participants were asked to indicate which of the facts were irrelevant to
solving the mystery. Koreans reported believing that far fewer
facts were irrelevant than did European Americans. Asian Americans were intermediate between the other two groups.
Hindsight bias. An advantage of the more simplistic, rulebased stance of the Westerner may be that surprise is a frequent
event. Post hoc explanations may be relatively difficult to generate, and epistemic curiosity may be piqued. The curiosity, in turn,
may provoke a search for new, possibly superior models to explain
events. In contrast, if Eastern theories about the world are less
focused, and a wide range of factors are presumed to be potentially
relevant to any given outcome, it may be harder to recognize that
a particular outcome could not have been predicted. Hindsight bias
(Fischhoff, 1975), or the tendency to assume that one knew all
along that a given outcome was likely, might therefore be greater
for Easterners.
These notions were tested in a series of experiments by I. Choi
and Nisbett (I. Choi, 1998; I. Choi & Nisbett, 2000). One study
presented a scenario based on the "Good Samaritan" experiment of
Darley and Batson (1973). Participants were told about one particular young seminary student, who, they were assured, was a
very kind and religious person. He was headed across campus to
deliver a sermon and along the way he encountered a man lying in
a doorway asking for help. Participants were also told that the
seminarian was late to deliver his sermon. In Condition A, where
participants did not know what the target had done, they were
asked what they thought was the probability that the target would
help and how surprised they would be if they were to find out that
he had not helped. Both Koreans and Americans reported about an
80% probability that the target would help and indicated they
would be quite surprised if he did not. In Condition B, participants
were told the target had helped the victim, and in Condition C they
were told he had not helped the victim. Participants in these
conditions were asked what they believed they would have regarded as the probability that the target would have helped—if, in
fact, they had not been told what he did—and also how surprised

299

they were by his actual behavior. Again, both Koreans and Americans in Condition B indicated they would have thought the probability of helping was about 80%, and both groups reported no
surprise that he did help. Americans in Condition C, where the
target unexpectedly did not help the victim, also reported that they
would have thought the probability was about 80% that the target
would have helped and reported a great deal of surprise that he did
not do so. In contrast, Koreans in Condition C reported that they
would have thought the probability was only about 50% that the
target would have helped and reported little surprise that he did
not. Thus Americans experienced surprise where Koreans did not,
and Koreans showed a very pronounced hindsight bias, indicating
that they thought they knew something all along which in fact they
did not.
Influence of alternative possibilities on surprise at outcomes.
An additional study by I. Choi and Nisbett (in press) indicates that
Easterners are not as surprised by unanticipated outcomes as
Americans are. We would expect Westerners to regard a scientific
finding as more likely if they had previously been presented only
with a theory that would lead them to expect that finding than if
they had also been presented in addition with a theory that would
lead them to expect the opposite. On the other hand, if Koreans are
in the habit of regarding outcomes as inevitable, then we would not
necessarily expect them to be much more surprised when presented with two opposing theories than when presented only with
the theory predicting the actual outcome. And, indeed, this is what
was found. Americans reported being more surprised when presented with two strongly competing hypotheses, whereas Koreans
were no more surprised when presented with two opposing hypotheses than when presented with only one.
Surprise when an "outcome " is found not to be true. In a final
study, I. Choi and Nisbett (2000) showed that Koreans expressed
little surprise even when an outcome literally contradicted another
outcome they had just read about. Participants read either that
scientific research had shown that more-optimistic people have
better mental health or that more-realistic people do. Participants
rated how surprising they found this result to be. Then, under a
ruse, the experimenter "discovered" that the materials they had
read were mistaken, due to a printing error, and that it was the
opposite hypothesis that had been supported. Apologetically, he
asked the participants if they would fill out the materials again.
Americans reported substantial surprise if they read that it was the
less plausible, "realism" hypothesis that, after all, was the correct
one. Koreans reported much less surprise than Americans.6
The results support the view that East Asians have complicated
but underspecified theories about the world that leave them insufficiently surprised by outcomes that differ from those that are
anticipated. Thus, we would maintain that the same cognitive
predispositions that make Asians less prone to the fundamental
attribution error leave them prey to the hindsight bias and may also
reduce their epistemic curiosity.

6
When shown only one hypothesis, Koreans and Americans regarded
the "optimism" hypothesis as equally likely and the two groups also
regarded the "realism" hypothesis as equally likely. Neither Americans nor
Koreans expressed much surprise when the more plausible hypothesis
replaced the less plausible one.

300

NISBETT, PENG, CHOI, AND NORENZAYAN

Relationships and Similarities Versus Rules and
Categories
If Westerners attribute causality primarily to objects, it seems
likely that they do so on the basis of rules that they presume to
govern the behavior of objects. Rules, in turn, are of value to the
extent that they apply over a large number and specifiable type of
objects, that is, to a category. Thus rules and categories would be
expected to be a major basis of organizing events for Westerners.
If Easterners attribute causality primarily to the field, then it is
relationships between the object and the field, and relationships
among events in the field, that might serve as the basis of organization. There is a good deal of evidence supporting these
expectations.
Relationships versus categories as the basis for grouping.
Chiu (1972) gave items consisting of three pictures of human,
vehicle, furniture, tool, or food categories to American and Chinese children. Children were asked "to choose any two of the three
objects in a set which were alike or went together and to state the
reason for the choice" (p. 237). The dominant style of the Chinese
children was "relational-contextual." For example, shown a picture
of a man, a woman, and a child, the Chinese children were likely
to group the woman and child together because "the mother takes
care of the baby." In contrast, American children were much more
likely to group objects on the basis of category membership or
shared features, for example, to group the man and the woman
because "they are both adults."
Relationships versus categories as the basis for judgments of
association. Ji and Nisbett (Ji, 2001; Ji & Nisbett, 2001) obtained
the same results as Chiu did with adult Chinese and American
college students, who were tested in their native languages. They
asked participants to indicate which of two objects out of three,
described verbally, were most closely related. In all cases, two of
the objects shared some kind of relationship, either functional
(e.g., pencil and notebook) or contextual (e.g., sky and sunshine)
and also shared a category (e.g., notebook and magazine) or some
feature that would allow them to be categorized together (e.g.,
sunshine and brightness). Chinese were more likely to group on the
basis of relationships, and Americans were more likely to group on
the basis of categories or shared object features. Participants were
asked to justify their groupings and Chinese were found to be more
likely to offer relationships as the justification ("the sun is in the
sky"), whereas Americans were more likely to offer category
membership as the justification ("the sun and the sky are both in
the heavens").
Family resemblance versus rules as the basis for judgments of
similarity. Norenzayan, Nisbett, Smith, and Kim (2000; Norenzayan, 1999) presented East Asians (Chinese and Koreans), Asian
Americans, and European Americans with a series of stimuli on a
computer screen in which a simple target object appeared beneath
two groups of four similar objects. The groups were always constructed so that the use of a family resemblance strategy and the
use of a rule strategy led to different responses (Kemler-Nelson,
1984). The objects in one group had a close family resemblance to
one another and to the target object, whereas the objects in the
other group did not share a close resemblance with the target
object. Instead, the objects of the second group were all describable by a unidimensional, deterministic rule; for example, they all
had a curved stem (vs. a straight stem), and the rule was also
applicable to the target object. Participants were asked to indicate

to which group the target object was most similar. A majority of
East Asian participants picked the "family resemblance" group,
whereas a majority of the European American participants picked
the "rule" group. Asian Americans showed intermediate reasoning,
having equal preferences for the rule group and the family resemblance group.
Categories and induction. Osherson, Smith, Wilkie, Lopez,
and Shafir (1990) have proposed a theory of inductive inference
from categories, which holds that people's willingness to generalize is in part a function of the extent to which premise categories
"cover" the lowest level category that includes all premise categories. Thus, when people are told that lions and giraffes have a
particular property, they are more willing to infer that rabbits have
the property than when they are told that lions and tigers have the
property (since lions and giraffes provide more coverage of the
category mammal than do lions and tigers). Work by I. Choi,
Nisbett, and Smith (1997) indicates that Koreans make less use of
categories for purposes of inductive inference than do Americans.
For example, they were less influenced than Americans by coverage of the category—unless the category was made salient in some
way. In one manipulation, the category was mentioned in the
conclusion (i.e., participants made an inference about "mammals"
rather than "rabbits"). This manipulation had no effect on Americans but increased the degree to which Koreans relied on the
category. Thus categories are apparently less spontaneously salient for Koreans and, hence, are less available for guiding
generalizations.
Category learning. If East Asians are relatively unlikely to use
explicit rules for assigning attributes to objects and objects to
categories, then it might be more difficult for them to learn how to
classify objects by applying rale systems. Work by Norenzayan et
al. (2000) suggests this is the case. Adopting a paradigm of Allen
and Brooks (1991), they presented East Asians, Asian Americans,
and European Americans with cartoon animals on a computer
screen and told them that some of the animals were from Venus
and some were from Saturn. Participants in an exemplar-based
categorization condition were asked simply to observe a series of
animals and make guesses, with feedback, about the category to
which each belonged. Other participants were assigned to a rule
condition and went through a formal, rule-based category learning
procedure. They were told to pay attention to five different properties of the animals—curly tail, knobby antennas, and so forth—
and were told that if the animal had any three of these properties
it was from Venus; otherwise, it was from Saturn.
Asian and American participants performed equally well at the
exemplar-based categorization task with respect both to errors and
to speed of response. But in the rale condition, East Asian participants' response times were slower than those of Americans. Most
tellingly, when the test trial in the rale condition presented an
animal that met the formal rale criteria for a given category but
more closely resembled an animal in the other category—thus
placing rule-based and memory-based categorizations in conflict—Asians made more errors of classification than did Americans. (They did not make more errors when the test animal more
closely resembled an instance of the category of which it was also
a member in terms of the formal rule, and thus either a rale-based
decision or an exemplar-based decision would yield the right
answer.) Asian Americans' performance was almost identical to
that of European Americans for both speed and accuracy.

CULTURE AND THOUGHT

Thus the results of several studies indicate that East Asians rely
less on rules and categories and more on relationships and similarities in organizing their worlds than do Americans. East Asians
preferred to group objects on the basis of relationships and similarity, whereas Americans were more likely to group objects on the
basis of categories and rules. Americans were more likely to rely
spontaneously on categories for purposes of inductive reasoning
than were East Asians and found it easier to learn and use rulebased categories.

Formal Logic Versus Experiential Knowledge
There is a long Western tradition—from the ancient Greeks, to
the medieval Scholastics, to the prepositional logic theoreticians of
the late 19th and early 20th centuries—of analyzing argument
structure apart from content and of reasoning on the basis of the
underlying abstract propositions alone. Such a tradition has never
been common in the East, where instead there has been an explicit
disapproval of such decontextualizing practices and an emphasis
on the appropriateness of plausibility and sense experience in
evaluating propositions. Several studies suggest that East Asians
do indeed rely less on formal logic and more on experiential
knowledge in reasoning than do Americans—at any rate when
logic and experience are in conflict.
Typicality versus logic. Consider the following two deductive
arguments. Is one more convincing than the other?
1. All birds have ulnar arteries.
Therefore, all eagles have ulnar arteries.
2. All birds have ulnar arteries.
Therefore, all penguins have ulnar arteries.

One way to measure the extent to which people spontaneously
rely on formal logic versus experiential knowledge in reasoning is
to examine how they project properties (the "blank" property
"ulnar arteries" in the above example) from superordinate categories (birds) to subordinate categories (eagles, penguins). Notice
that the two arguments have identical premises, but their conclusions vary in the typicality of the exemplar. (Eagles are more
typical birds than penguins.) Reasoners who apply logic would
"see" the implicit middle premises of each argument ("All eagles
are birds," and "all penguins are birds"). Such reasoners would
find both deductive valid arguments equally convincing. But people often find typical arguments to be more convincing than
atypical ones (Sloman, 1993).
Norenzayan and colleagues (2000) asked Korean, Asian American, and European American participants to evaluate the convincingness of a series of such arguments. The responses of participants who received only typical arguments were compared with
those who received only atypical arguments. As expected, Koreans
showed a large typicality effect, being more convinced by typical
than by atypical arguments. European Americans, in contrast, were
equally convinced by typical and atypical arguments. Asian Americans' responses were in between those of European Americans
and Koreans. (When an experimental manipulation was introduced
that increased the salience of the typicality information, all three
groups showed the typicality effect to the same extent.)
Knowledge versus logic. In another study, Norenzayan and
colleagues (2000) presented participants with syllogisms that were
either valid or invalid and that had conclusions that were either

301

plausible or implausible. In addition, some arguments were presented in abstract form with no content. Korean and American
university students were instructed to evaluate the logical validity
of each argument and decide whether the conclusion followed
from the premises. Results showed that, overall, there was an
effect of logic as well as of knowledge, consistent with past
research. Thus, participants correctly judged valid arguments to be
more valid than invalid ones, and incorrectly judged arguments
with plausible conclusions to be more valid than arguments with
implausible conclusions. As predicted, Korean participants
showed a stronger "belief bias" for valid arguments than did
American students, being more inclined to judge valid arguments
as invalid if they had implausible conclusions. Importantly, this
difference cannot be attributed to cultural differences in the ability
to reason logically, since both cultural groups showed equal performance on the abstract items. Rather, the results indicate that
when logical structure conflicts with everyday belief, American
students are more willing to set aside empirical belief in favor of
logic than are Korean students.

Dialectics Versus the Law of Noncontradiction
Peng and Nisbett (Peng, 1997; Peng & Nisbett, 1999) have
maintained that East Asians do not have the same commitment to
avoiding the appearance of contradiction as do Westerners. Examples of rules about contradiction that have played a central role in
the Western intellectual tradition include the following:
1. The law of identity: A = A. A thing is identical to itself.
2. The law of noncontradiction: A + not-A. No statement can be both
true and false.
3. The law of the excluded middle: Any statement is either true or
false.

Following the proposals of many philosophers of both the East
and the West (e.g., Liu, 1974; Needham, 1962/1978; Zhang &
Chen, 1991), Peng and Nisbett argued that there is a tradition in
Eastern philosophy that is opposed at its roots to the formal logic
tradition, namely the dialectical approach. So-called "naive dialecticism" resembles the dialectic of Hegel and Marx inasmuch as
it sometimes involves the creation of a synthesis from a thesis and
antithesis. But more commonly it involves transcending, accepting, or even insisting on the contradiction among premises (Huff,
1993; Liu, 1974; Lloyd, 1990; Needham, 1962; Zhang & Chen,
1991; Zhou, 1990). Peng and Nisbett (1999) characterized dialecticism in terms of three principles.
1. The principle of change: Reality is a process that is not static but
rather is dynamic and changeable. A thing need not be identical to
itself at all because of the fluid nature of reality.
2. The principle of contradiction: Partly because change is constant,
contradiction is constant. Thus old and new, good and bad, exist in the
same object or event and indeed depend on one another for their
existence.
3. The principle of relationship or holism: Because of constant
change and contradiction, nothing either in human life or in nature is
isolated and independent, but instead everything is related. It follows
that attempting to isolate elements of some larger whole can only be
misleading.

302

NISBETT, PENG, CHOI, AND NORENZAYAN

These principles are, of course, not altogether alien to Western
epistemology of either the naive or the professional sort. Indeed,
Western developmental psychologists (Bakes & Staudinger, 1993;
Basseches, 1980, 1984; Riegel, 1973) have argued that such "postformal" principles are learned in late adolescence and early adulthood to one degree or another by Westerners and that "wisdom"
consists in part of being able to supplement the use of formal
operations with a more holistic, dialectical approach to problems.
But evidence we now present indicates that Western reliance on
dialectical principles is weaker than that of Easterners, and Western reliance on the foundational principles of formal logic, especially the principle of noncontradiction, is stronger.
Dialectical resolution of social contradictions. Peng and Nisbett (Peng, 1997; Peng & Nisbett, 1999) presented Chinese and
American students with contradictions drawn from everyday life.
For example, they were asked to analyze a conflict between
mothers and their daughters and between having fun and going to
school. American responses tended to come down in favor of one
side or the other ("mothers should respect daughters' independence"). Chinese responses were more likely to find a "Middle
Way," which found merit and fault on both sides and attempted to
reconcile the contradiction ("both the mothers and the daughters
have failed to understand each other").
Dialecticism and preferred argument form. Peng and Nisbett
(Peng, 1997; Peng & Nisbett, 1999) gave Chinese and American
participants, all of whom were graduate students in the natural
sciences, two different types of arguments for each of two different
propositions and asked them to indicate which argument they
preferred. In each case, one of the arguments was a logical one
involving contradiction and one was a dialectical one. Thus, in one
problem, two arguments for the existence of God were pitted
against one another. One was a variant of the so-called "cosmological" or "first cause" argument. It holds that because everything
must have a cause, this creates an infinite regression of cause and
effect unless there is a primary cause by an infinite being. The
dialectical argument applied the principle of holism, stating that
when two people see the same object, such as a cup, from different
perspectives, one person sees some aspects of the cup, and the
other sees other aspects. But there must be a God above all
individual perspectives who sees the truth about the object. Americans preferred the argument based on noncontradiction in each
case, and Chinese preferred the dialectic one.
Judgments about contradictory propositions. One of the strongest implications of the notion that Westerners adhere to a logical
analysis of problems is that, when presented with apparently
contradictory propositions, they should be inclined to reject one in
favor of the other. Easterners, on the other hand, committed to the
principle of the Middle Way, might be inclined to embrace both
propositions, finding them each to have merit. In one study, Peng
and Nisbett (1999) presented participants with either one proposition or two propositions that were, if not outright contradictions, at
least very different and on the surface unlikely to both be true. The
propositions were presented in the form of social science studies.
For example, one proposition was: "A survey found that older
inmates are more likely to be ones who are serving long sentences
because they have committed severely violent crimes. The authors
concluded that they should be held in prison even in the case of a
prison population crisis." Its counterpart was: "A report on the
prison overcrowding issue suggests that older inmates are less

likely to commit new crimes. Therefore, if there is a prison
population crisis, they should be released first."
Participants read about one of these studies (A or B) or both (A
and B) and rated their plausibility. In the case of all five issues
presented, Chinese and American participants agreed on which of
the two was the more plausible. In the A and B condition, Americans judged the plausibility of the more plausible proposition as
greater than did Americans who read only the more plausible
assertion by itself. Thus Americans actually found a contradicted
assertion to be more plausible than the same proposition when not
contradicted, a normatively dubious tendency that indicates that
they felt substantial pressure to resolve the contradiction by buttressing their prior beliefs. (This finding is reminiscent of one by
Lord, Ross, & Lepper [1979], who found that when people read
about two different studies, one supporting their view on capital
punishment and one opposing it, they were more convinced of
their initial position than if they had not read about any studies.) In
contrast, Chinese participants in the A and B condition resolved
the contradiction between the two propositions by finding them to
be equally plausible, as if they felt obligated to find merit in both
the conflicting propositions. They actually found the less plausible
proposition to have more merit when it had been contradicted than
when it had not—also a normatively dubious inference but utterly
different in kind from that of the Americans.
Persuasion by strong versus weak arguments. If Westerners
respond to apparent contradiction by trying to decide which side is
correct, but Easterners respond by yielding points to both sides,
then the two groups might respond differently to arguments against
an initially held position. Westerners might increase their confidence in their initial position when presented with a weak argument, whereas Easterners might decrease their confidence. This is
what was found by Davis and her colleagues (Davis, 2000; Davis,
Nisbett, & Schwarz, 2000). They presented groups of Korean,
Asian American, and European American participants with a set of
strong arguments in favor of funding a particular scientific project.
They presented another group with the same set of strong "Pro"
arguments and an additional set of weak arguments against funding the project. Korean and American participants were equally in
favor of funding the project when presented with just the strong
"Pro" arguments, but the two groups behaved in qualitatively
different ways when presented additionally with weak "anti" arguments. Koreans were more unfavorable when weak "anti" arguments were added. But Americans were actually more favorable
toward funding the project when presented with the additional
weak "anti" arguments than when presented with no "anti" arguments—behavior that is normatively quite suspect.
Justification of choice. The Western preference for principleguided decisions and the Eastern preference for the "Middle Way"
appears to apply also for actual choice behavior. Briley, Morris,
and Simonson (2000) studied the consumer choices of East Asians
and European Americans. All choices were among a triad of
objects that differed on two dimensions. Object A was superior to
both Object B and C on one dimension, and Object C was superior
to both Object A and B on the other dimension. Object B was
always intermediate between A and C on both dimensions. On
average, across the range of choices, Americans and East Asians in
a control condition were about equally likely to choose intermediate Object B. In an experimental condition, Briley et al. had
participants give reasons for their choice. They anticipated that this
would prompt Americans to look for a simple rule that would

CULTURE AND THOUGHT
justify a given choice (e.g., "RAM is more important than hard
drive space") but would prompt people of Asian culture to seek a
compromise ("both RAM and hard drive space are important").
This is what was found. Americans in the justification condition
moved to a preference for one of the extreme objects whose choice
could be justified with reference to a simple rule, whereas Asian
culture participants moved to a preference for the compromise
object. Justifications given by participants were consistent with
their choices, with Americans being more likely to give rule-based
justifications and Chinese being more likely to give compromisebased justifications.
Thus there is substantial evidence to indicate that Easterners are
not concerned with contradiction in the same way as are Westerners. They have a greater preference for compromise solutions and
holistic arguments; they are more willing to endorse apparently
contradictory arguments; and they are more willing to move their
beliefs in the direction of an argument, even when it is a weak one.
Finally, when asked to justify their choices, they seem to move to
a compromise, "middle way" instead of referring to a dominating
principle. It should be noted that the greater adherence to the
principle of noncontradiction on the part of Americans seems to
produce no guarantee against normatively questionable inferences.
On the contrary, their adherence to the principle of noncontradiction may sometimes cause them to become more extreme in their
judgments under conditions in which the evidence indicates they
should become less extreme. This tendency mirrors complaints
about hyperlogical Western habits of mind often expressed by
philosophers and social critics (Korzybyski, 1933/1994; Lin, 1936;
Liu, 1974; Nagashima, 1973; Saul, 1992).

Creating and Sustaining Systems of Thought
What produced the differences in ancient times? What sustains
them today? These are matters of speculation, of course, so we will
confine our response to brief considerations, especially for the
first, historical question.

The Origin of Sociocognitive Systems
The explanation for the cognitive differences that we prefer is a
distally materialistic but proximally social one that we have put
together from the arguments of scholars in a large number of
disciplines (Barry, Child, & Bacon, 1959; Berry, 1976; Cromer,
1993; Nakamura, 1964/1985; Needham, 1954; Whiting & Child,
1953; Whiting & Whiting, 1975; Witkin & Berry, 1975).
Chinese civilization was based on agriculture, which entailed
that substantial cooperation with neighbors was necessary to carry
out economic activities in an effective way. This is especially true
of the rice agriculture common in the south of China. China was
organized at the level of the large state very early on, and society
was complex and hierarchical: The king and later the Emperor and
the bureaucracy were ever-present controlling factors in the lives
of individual Chinese. Harmony and social order were thus central
to Chinese society. Social scientists since Marx have observed that
economic and social arrangements such as these are generally
associated with "collectivist" or "interdependent" social orientations as distinguished from "individualistic" or "independent" social orientations that are characteristic of societies with economies

303

based on hunting, fishing, trading, or the modern market economy.
In marked contrast to all the other great civilizations of the
ancient world, the Greek economy was not completely dependent
on agriculture. The Greek ecology conspired against an agrarian
base, consisting as it does mostly of mountains descending to the
sea. This sort of ecology was more suited to herding and fishing
than to large-scale agriculture. The sense of personal agency that
characterized the Greeks could have been the natural response to
the genuine freedom that they experienced in their less socially
complex society.
The politically decentralized Greek cities also provided great
scope of action as compared to Chinese cities. Greeks who wished
to leave one city for another were free to do so: The sea provided
an escape route for dissidents. In addition, Greeks were involved in
trade at one of the crossroads of the world. Thus they would have
had plenty to pique their curiosity and much to discuss. The nature
of social relations meant that debate would have posed few interpersonal risks, and the authority structure of the city state was too
weak to prevent the free expression of opinion. Indeed for Athens
and other city states debate was an integral part of the political
system.
Speculative as it is, this view has the virtue that it at least is
consistent with the economic changes that preceded the Renaissance, namely, the reduced reliance on agriculture and the rise of
relatively independent city-states with economies based on crafts
and trade. During the Renaissance, the West recapitulated some of
the Greek social forms and intellectual traditions, including the
rediscovery of science. The invention of the printing press greatly
enhanced the conditions of freedom of thought. Ironically, though
the Chinese invented movable type before the Europeans did, it
was suppressed in China, on the quite correct grounds that the
authority of the government would be undermined by it.
Some research by Witkin and his colleagues gives credence to
the notion that stronger social networks might produce a more
holistic orientation to the world. Berry and Witkin (Berry, 1967,
1976; Witkin & Berry, 1975) showed that farmers in a number of
societies are more field dependent than hunters, herders, or industrialized peoples. Witkin and his colleagues (Adevai, Silverman, &
McGough, 1970; Dershowitz, 1971; Meizlik, 1973) found that
Orthodox Jewish boys, whose families and communities require
strict observance of a variety of social rules, were more field
dependent than were secular Jewish boys, who in turn were more
field dependent than Protestant boys. These differences held even
when general intelligence was controlled for. Moreover, individual
differences in social orientation within a culture apparently are
associated with field dependence. Americans who are more interested in social activities and in dealing with other people are more
field dependent (even when intelligence is controlled) than are
people with less social interest (Witkin & Goodenough, 1977;
Witkin, Price-Williams, et al., 1974).
Finally, Kiihnen, Hannover, and Schubert (2000) were able to
prime field dependence on the Embedded Figures Test by a variety
of techniques intended to make participants temporarily more
collectivist in their orientations. For example, they asked participants to think about what they had in common with family and
friends (vs. asking them to think about how they differed from
family and friends). The results confirmed that a collectivist prime
led to more field dependence.

304

NISBETT, PENG, CHOI, AND NORENZAYAN

Sociocognitive Systems in Homeostasis
Mere inertia would not result in contemporary differences in the
way people think. We propose that systems of thought exist in
homeostasis with the social practices that surround them. We will
describe a number of ways in which the social practices and
cognitive processes could support or "prime" one another (Y.-y.
Hong, Morris, Chiu, & Benet-Martinez, 2000).
Holistic versus analytic practices.
\. The practice of feng shui for choosing building sites (even
Hong Kong skyscrapers) may encourage the idea that the factors
affecting outcomes are extraordinarily complex and interactive,
which in turn encourages the search for relationships in the field.
This may be contrasted with more atomistic and rule-based approaches to problem-solving characteristic of the West. Consider,
for example, the nature of approaches to self-help in the West:
"The Three Steps to a Comfortable Retirement" or "Six Ways to
Increase Your Word Power."
2. Employees in the top one third of the Japanese economy are
rotated among their company's divisions frequently, to be able to
see the company's operations from as many viewpoints as possible. A graduate of a top university would be expected to work in
the factory for the first year or two of employment and might
actually represent union employees to the company (HampdenTurner & Trompenaars, 1993).
3. The West, beginning in the 18th century and continuing at an
increasingly rapid pace into the 20th century, introduced "modularity"—that is, uniform, atomistic, and interchangeable design
and production (Shore, 1996). From the introduction of piece good
manufacture in English cottages to Henry Ford's production line to
the chain restaurant, the West—and America in particular—remain
the chief innovators and consumers of modular production and
products.
4. The most popular game of intellectuals in the East is Go and
the most popular in the West is chess. Xia (1997) and Campbell
(1983) have pointed out that Go is more complex and holistic than
chess, the analytic game par excellence. Go boards have 1 9 X 1 9
spaces whereas chess boards have 8 x 8 spaces. Go pieces have
more variation in possible moves than do chess pieces, which must
adhere to a fixed set of rules for movement. Hence, moves in Go
are more difficult to predict. The appropriate strategy for Go has
been termed dialectic in that the "competition between the black
and white is a well calculated trade-off. . . . It is not wise to be
greedy and overplay" (Xia, 1997).
Argument, debate, and rhetoric.
1. In daily life, East Asians strive to maintain harmony. Ohbuchi and Takahasi (1994) asked Japanese and American businesspeople how they dealt with conflict with their fellow managers.
Twice as many Japanese as American respondents reported using
avoidance as a means of dealing with a conflict of views, and three
times as many Americans as Japanese reported attempting to use
persuasion.
2. Decision processes in boardrooms and executive councils in
Japan are designed to avoid conflicts. Meetings often consist of
nothing more than the ratification of consensus among members
obtained by the leader prior to the meeting.
3. Western educators often complain that their Asian students
do not participate in class discussions and that they do not follow
the requirements of rhetoric in their writings—for example, statement of principles and assumptions, derivations, hypotheses, evi-

dence, argumentation, conclusion. Neither their culture nor their
prior educational experience has prepared them for the canonical
rhetoric forms that are taken for granted in the West. (See Tweed
& Lehman, 2000, for a review.)
4. Galtung (1981) has described the intellectual styles of academics from different cultures. The Anglo-American style "fosters
and encourages debate and discourse .. . and pluralism is an overriding value" (pp. 823-824). In contrast, for the Japanese, "the
first rule would be not to harm pre-established social relations"
(p. 825).
Law and contracts.
1. Although the ancient Chinese had a complex legal system, it
was in general not codified in the way it was in the West (Logan,
1986). Today, courts of law are relatively rare in the East, and
there is a marked preference for solving conflicts on the basis of
the particulars of a specific case and by negotiation through a
middleman (Leung & Morris, in press).
2. Easterners and Westerners have fundamentally different understandings of the nature of contracts. In the West, a contract is
unalterable; in the East, a contract is continually renegotiable in the
light of changed circumstances (Hampden-Turner & Trompenaars,
1993). This drastic difference of view has often resulted in conflict
and bitterness between Eastern and Western negotiators.
Religion.
1. Some scholars have contended that Christianity has far stronger theological concerns than other religions have, finding it "necessary to formulate elaborately precise statements about the abstract qualities and relations of gods and humans" (Dyson, 1998,
p. 8).
2. Religions in East Asia have long been characterized by their
interpenetrating and blending qualities. Societies and individuals
readily incorporate aspects of several different religions into their
worldviews. In contrast, for Christians, there is a strong tendency
toward insistence on doctrinal purity. This sometimes results in
religious wars in the West, a rarity in East Asia.
Language and writing. Perhaps the most pervasive and important of all practices that operate to sustain the cognitive differences
are those having to do with language and writing. Indeed, some
scholars, notably Logan (1986), have tried to make the case that
most of the cognitive differences we have discussed are due
primarily to differences in language and writing systems.
1. The basic writing system of Chinese and other East Asian
languages has been essentially pictographic. It can be maintained
that the Western alphabet is more atomistic and analytic by nature
and "is a natural tool for classifying and served as a paradigm for
codified law, scientific classification, and standardized weights
and measures" (Logan, p. 55).
2. The actual grammar of Indo-European languages encourages
thinking of the world as being composed of atomistic building
blocks, whereas East Asian languages encourage thinking of the
world as continuous and interpenetrating. "[R]ather than onemany, the Chinese language motivates a part-whole dichotomy"
(Hansen, 1983, p. vii).
3. East Asian languages are highly contextual in every sense.
Because of their multiple meanings, words must be understood in
the context of sentences. Because of the minimal nature of syntax
in Sinitic languages, context is important to understanding sentences (Freeman & Habermann, 1996). In contrast, Heath (1982)
has shown that language socialization for middle-class American
children quite deliberately decontextualizes language. Parents try

CULTURE AND THOUGHT

to make words understandable independent of verbal context and
utterances understandable independent of situational context.
4. Although Western toddlers learn nouns (i.e., words referring
to objects) at a much more rapid rate than they learn verbs (i.e.,
words referring to relationships), the reverse appears to be true for
Chinese (Tardif, 1996) and Koreans (S. Choi & Gopnik, 1995).
Moreover, Western toddlers hear more noun phrases from their
mothers, whereas East Asian children hear more verbs (Fernald &
Morikawa, 1993; Tardif, Shatz, & Naigles, 1997).
5. "Generic" noun phrases—that is, those referring to categories and kinds (e.g., "birds," "tools," as opposed to exemplars such
as "sparrow," "hammer")—are more common for English speakers
than for Chinese speakers (Gelman & Tardif, 1998), perhaps
because Western languages mark in a more explicit way whether
a generic interpretation of an utterance is the correct one (Lucy,
1992).
6. Consistent with the above findings about category usage, Ji
and Nisbett (Ji, 2001; Ji & Nisbett, 2001) found that Englishspeaking Chinese used relationships more and categories less
when they grouped words in Chinese than when they did so in
English.
Thus there are some good reasons to believe that social practices
and cognitive ones maintain each other in a state of equilibrium.
Cognitive practices may be highly stable because of their embeddedness in larger systems of beliefs and social practices.

Implications for Psychology
Magnitude of

Effects

The cognitive differences we have discussed vary in size, but it
is important to note that many of them are unusually large, whether
the standard is the magnitude of mean or proportion differences
(often on the order of 2:1, 3:1, or higher) or effect size (often well
in excess of 1.00).
But, in fact, most of the differences we have reported are not
merely large. The East Asians and the Americans responded in
qualitatively different ways to the same stimulus situation in study
after study. For example, American participants showed large
primacy effects in judgments about covariation, whereas Chinese
participants showed none. "Control" tended to increase the degree
of covariation seen and the self-reported accuracy of Americans
but tended to have the opposite effect on Chinese, and "control"
increased the accuracy and confidence of American participants
for the rod-and-frame test but had no effect for Chinese participants (Ji et al., 2000). Similarly, Cha and Nam (1985) and Norenzayan, Choi, and Nisbett (2001) found that Koreans were greatly
influenced in their causal attributions by the sort of situational
information that has no effect for Americans. I. Choi and Nisbett
(in press) found that Koreans showed large hindsight bias effects
under conditions where Americans showed none. Peng and Nisbett
(1999) found that Americans responded to contradiction by polarizing their beliefs, whereas Chinese responded by moderating their
beliefs. Qualitative differences, with Americans responding in one
way and East Asians in another, were found in other studies by
Briley et al. (2000), I. Choi and Nisbett (1998), Davis et al. (2000),
Norenzayan et al. (2000), and Peng and Nisbett (1999). These
qualitative differences indicate that literally different cognitive
processes are often invoked by East Asians and Westerners dealing
with the same problem.

305

Universality
The assumption of universality of cognitive processes lies deep
in the psychological tradition. We believe that the results discussed
here force consideration of the possibility that an indefinitely large
number of presumably "basic" cognitive processes may be highly
malleable. When psychologists perform experiments on "categorization," "inductive inference," "logical reasoning," or "attributional processes," it does not normally occur to them that their data
may apply only rather locally, to people raised in a tradition of
European culture. They are, of course, prepared for parameter
differences, but parameter differences between populations on the
order of 3:1 or more provide an occasion for wondering about
universality. It is no exaggeration to state that qualitative differences between populations preempt any claim to universality—
unless there is reason to believe that experimental procedures are
not comparable across groups.
Just how great the cultural differences can be is unclear at this
point, of course. Moreover, although we have looked at tasks that
measure important perceptual and cognitive variables, we have no
way of knowing what population these variables were selected
from. It is possible that the particular variables we have examined
exhibit cultural differences that are substantially greater than the
differences that might be found in other tasks that are equally good
measures of the conceptual variables. But it is equally—if not
more—probable that investigators have not been uncannily insightful at this early stage of research and that there are variables
and measures that would show even larger differences than the
ones we have examined. Moreover, the participant populations,
consisting mostly of college students, would be expected to be
more similar to one another than to more representative members
of their parent populations.

Fixedness of Cognitive Content
It is ironic that, just as our evidence indicates that some cognitive processes are highly susceptible to cultural influence, other
investigators are providing evidence that some cognitive content
may not be very susceptible to cultural influence. Naive theories of
mechanics and physics (Baillargeon, 1995; Carey & Spelke, 1994;
Leslie, 1982; Spelke, 1988, 1990), naive theories of biology (Atran, 1990, 1995; Berlin, 1992; Berlin, Breedlove, & Raven, 1973;
Gelman, 1988) and naive theory of mind (Asch, 1952; D'Andrade,
1987; Leslie, 1994; Wellman, 1990) appear so early and are
apparently so widespread that it seems quite likely that at least
some aspects of them are largely innate and resistant to social
modification. Theories of causality—both highly general ones
having to do with temporal sequence and spatial contiguity (Seligman, 1970), as well as highly specific ones, such as the link that
all omnivorous mammals are likely to make between distinctivetasting food and gastrointestinal illness experienced many hours
later (Garcia, McGowan, Ervin, & Koelling, 1968)—are clearly a
part of the organism's biologically given cognitive equipment.
Hirschfeld (1996) has argued that "essentialist" beliefs about the
nature of the social world are universal, and Sperber (1985) and
Boyer (1993) have argued that even religious conceptions such as
spirits and superhuman agents are remarkably similar from one
culture to another. As Sperber (1996) has written, the human mind
is equipped with a set of cognitive properties that make it easier or
harder to think certain kinds of thoughts.

306

NISBETT, PENG, CHOI, AND NORENZAYAN

Thus, it appears that the assumption that cognitive content is
learned and indefinitely malleable and the assumption that cognitive processes are universally the same and biologically fixed may
both be quite wrong. Some important content may be universal and
part of our biologically given equipment, and some important
processes may be highly alterable. The continued existence on the
planet of widely different social and intellectual traditions offers
an opportunity to learn a great deal more about the fixedness and
malleability of both content and process.

The Inseparability of Process and Content
Our theoretical position is at the same time less radical and more
radical than the assertion that basic processes differ across cultures. We are urging the view that metaphysics, epistemology, and
cognitive processes exist in mutually dependent and reinforcing
systems of thought, such that a given stimulus situation often
triggers quite different processes in one culture than in another.
Thus it is not possible to make a sharp distinction between cognitive process and cognitive content. Content in the form of metaphysical beliefs about the nature of the world determines tacit
epistemology. Tacit epistemology in turn dictates the cognitive
procedures that people use for solving particular problems.
People who believe that knowledge about objects is normally
both necessary and sufficient for understanding their behavior will
believe it is important to find the appropriate categories that apply
to the object and the appropriate rules that apply to the categories.
The search for categories and rules will dictate particular ways of
organizing knowledge as well as procedures for obtaining new
knowledge about rules. Such practices in turn are aided by a
reliance on formal logic, especially including attention to the
specter of contradiction that undermines beliefs about the validity
of rules. Abstractions will be a goal because categories and rules
will seem to be useful just to the extent that they have wide
applicability and because it can be easier to apply formal logic to
abstractions than to concrete objects.
Similar points can be made about people who believe that
causality is a complex function of multiple factors operating on an
object in a field. Complexity indicates dynamism and constant
change. A belief in change and instability will tend to make the
habits of categorization and of search for universal rules about
objects seem dubiously relevant. Rather, an attempt to see the
interrelatedness of events will seem important. Contradiction will
seem inevitable, since change is constant, and opposing factors
always coexist. A concern with concrete objects and events will
seem to be more useful than will a search for abstractions. Logic
will not be allowed to overrule sensory experience or common
sense.
Thus, without saying that Easterners are unable to make use of
categorization or that Westerners are unable to detect covariation,
we can see that the differences between cultures can still be very
great: (a) The circumstances that prompt the use of one process
versus another will differ substantially across cultures; (b) the
frequencies with which the very most basic cognitive processes are
used will differ greatly; (c) consequently, the degree and nature of
expertise in the use of particular cognitive processes will differ;
and (d) tacit or even explicit normative standards for thought will
differ across cultures (Stich, 1990).
Claude Levi-Strauss, the great French anthropologist, proposed
that, rn their attempts to solve the problems of daily life, people

might be regarded as bricoleurs—handymen with their bags of
cognitive tools. Pursuing this metaphor, we may say that even if all
cultures possessed essentially the same basic cognitive processes
as their tools, the tools of choice for the same problem may
habitually be very different. People may differ markedly in their
beliefs about whether a problem is one requiring use of a wrench
or pliers, in their skill in using the two types of tools, and in the
location of particular tools at the top or the bottom of the tool kit.
Moreover, members of different cultures may not see the same
stimulus situation as a problem in need of repair. A seeming
contradiction is a problem for Westerners but may not be for
Easterners. Indeed, as some of the perceptual work we have
reviewed indicates, the different focus of attention of Easterners
and Westerners indicates that they may sometimes not be seeing
the same stimulus situation at all—even when their heads are
immobilized at a fixed distance away from a computer screen.
Another way that cognitive processes can differ is that cultures
may construct composite cognitive tools out of the basic universal
toolkit, thereby performing acts of elaborate cognitive engineering,
as Dennett's (1995) characterization of culture as a "crane-making
crane" (p. 338) suggests. Modern statistical, methodological, and
cost-benefit rules provide examples of such crane-produced
cranes. Nothing like them existed prior to the 17th century, when
they were constructed in the West on the basis of rule-based
empirical observation, mathematics, and formal logic, and there is
great variation among members of Western society today in the
degree of understanding and use of these rules. Similar points may
be made about the transformation of the ancient Chinese notions
about yin and yang into more sophisticated dialectical notions
about change, moderation, relativism, and the necessity of multiple
viewpoints.
The psychological ideas that our position most closely resembles are those in the tradition of Vygotsky (1978, 1987; e.g., Cole,
1995; Cole & Scribner, 1974; Hutchins, 1995; Lave, 1988; Luria,
1931; Rogoff, 1990), which insists that thought always occurs in a
pragmatic problem setting, including the cultural assumptions that
are brought to the task. This view, recently referred to as the
"situated cognition" view, has been defined by Resnick as the
assumption that "the tools of thought... embody a culture's intellectual history.... Tools have theories built into them, and users
accept these theories—albeit unknowingly—when they use these
tools" (Resnick, 1994, pp. 476-477).
The particular cognitive orientations we have been discussing
have endured for millennia. One of the questions that intrigues us
most concerns what it might take to seriously disturb the homeostasis of one of these historically rooted systems of thought. It
is not hard to introduce Westerners to cost-benefit rules; these
rules can affect their reasoning and their behavior and leave them
fully accepted members of their communities. It is far from clear
that it would be so easy to introduce East Asians to that rule
system, that it would leave members who adopted the rule system
so fully accepted by their communities or that it would leave
unscathed the sociocognitive homeostasis of their societies if the
rule system were to be widely adopted. There seems to be one
quite interesting case of resistance to change of a homeostatic
system. The introduction of the highly individualistic economic
element of capitalism into Japan 130 years ago appears to have had
far less effect on either social practices or, as our research indicates, cognitive processes, than might have been anticipated.

CULTURE AND THOUGHT
It is clear from some of the work summarized in this article that
Asians move radically in an American direction after a generation
or less in the United States. But it might be a mistake to extrapolate
from these facts and assume that would be an easy matter to teach
one culture's tools to individuals in another without total immersion in that culture. It is far from clear that, using normal pedagogical techniques, Americans could be given many of the advantages of a dialectical stance or that East Asians could be taught to
experience surprise at outcomes when surprise is warranted.
We hope we have persuaded the reader that the cognitive
processes triggered by a given situation may not be so universal as
generally supposed, or so divorced from content, or so independent
of the particular character of thought that distinguishes one human
group from another. Two decades ago, Richard E. Nisbett wrote a
book with Lee Ross entitled, modestly, Human Inference (Nisbett
& Ross, 1980). Roy D'Andrade, a distinguished cognitive anthropologist, read the book and told Richard Nisbett he thought it was
a "good ethnography." The author was shocked and dismayed. But
we now wholeheartedly agree with D'Andrade's contention about
the limits of research conducted in a single culture. Psychologists
who choose not to do cross-cultural psychology may have chosen
to be ethnographers instead.

References
Abel, T. M, & Hsu, F. I. (1949). Some aspects of personality of Chinese
as revealed by the Rorschach Test. Journal ofProjective Techniques, 13,
285-301.
Adevai, G., Silverman, A. J., & McGough, W. E. (1970). Ethnic differences in perceptual testing. International Journal of Social Psychiatry, 16, 237-239.
Allen, S. W., & Brooks, L. R. (1991). Specializing in the operation of an
explicit rule. Journal of Experimental Psychology: General, 120, 3-19.
Asch, S. (1952). Social psychology. Englewood Cliffs, NJ: Prentice Hall.
Atran, S. (1990). Cognitive foundations of natural history. New York:
Cambridge University Press.
Atran, S. (1995). Causal constraints on categories and categorical
constraints on biological reasoning across cultures. In D. Sperber, D.
Premack, & A. J. Premack (Eds.), Causal cognition: A multidisciplinary
debate (pp. 205-233). Oxford, England: Oxford University Press,
Bagley, C. (1995). Field independence in children in group-oriented cultures: Comparisons from China, Japan, and North America. The Journal
of Social Psychology, 135, 523-525.
Baillargeon, R. (1995). Physical reasoning in infancy. In M. S. Gazzaniga
(Ed.), The cognitive neurosciences (pp. 181-204). Cambridge, MA: MIT
Press.
Baltes, P. B., & Staudinger, U. M. (1993). The search for a psychology of
wisdom. Current Directions in Psychological Science, 2, 75-80.
Barry, H., Child, I., & Bacon, M. (1959). Relation of child training to
subsistence economy. American Anthropologist, 61, 51-63.
Basseches, M. (1980). Dialectical schemata: A framework for the empirical
study of the development of dialectical thinking. Human Development, 23, 400-421.
Basseches, M. (1984). Dialectical thinking and adult development. Norwood, NJ: Ablex.
Becker, C. B. (1986). Reasons for the lack of argumentation and debate in
the Far East. International Journal of Intercultural Relations, 10, 75-92.
Berlin, B. (1992). Ethnobiological classification: Principles of categorization of plants and animals in traditional societies. Princeton, NJ:
Princeton University Press.
Berlin, B., Breedlove, D., & Raven, P. (1973). General principles of
classification and nomenclature in folk biology. American Anthropologist, 74, 214-242.

307

Berry, J. W. (1967). Independence and conformity in subsistence-level
societies. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 7, 415-418.
Berry, J. W. (1976). Human ecology and cognitive style: Comparative
studies in cultural and psychological adaptation. New York: Sage/
Halsted.
Block, N. (1995). The mind as the software of the brain. In E. E. Smith &
D. N. Osherson (Eds.), Thinking: An invitation to the cognitive science
(pp. 377-425). Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Bond, M. H. (1996). Chinese values. In M. H. Bond (Ed.), Handbook of
Chinese psychology (pp. 208-226). Hong Kong, China: Oxford University Press.
Boyer, P. (1993). The naturalness of religious ideas. Berkeley: University
of California Press.
Briley, D. A., Morris, M., & Simonson, I. (2000). Reasons as carriers of
culture: Dynamic versus dispositional models of cultural influence on
decision making. Journal of Consumer Research, 27(2), 157-178.
Campbell, J. A. (1983). Go: Introduction. In M. A. Bramer (Ed.), Computer
game playing (pp. 136-140). Chicester, England: Ellis Horwood.
Carey, S., & Spelke, E. (1994). Domain-specific knowledge and conceptual change. In L. A. Hirschfeld & S. A. Gelman (Eds.), Mapping the
mind: Domain specificity in cognition and cognition (pp. 169-200).
Cambridge, England: Cambridge University Press.
Cha, J.-H., & Nam, K. D. (1985). A test of Kelley's cube theory of
attribution: A cross-cultural replication of McArthur's study. Korean
Social Science Journal, 12, 151-180.
Chalfonte, B. L., & Johnson, M. K. (1996). Feature memory and binding
in young and older adults. Memory & Cognition, 24, 403-416.
Chan, W.-T. (1967). The story of Chinese philosophy. In C. A. Moore
(Ed.), The Chinese mind: Essentials of Chinese philosophy and culture
(pp. 245-257). Honolulu, HI: East-West Center Press.
Chang, T.-S. (1939). A Chinese philosopher's theory of knowledge. Yenching Journal of Social Studies, 11(2).
Chavajay, P., & Rogoff, B. (2000). Cultural variation in management of
attention by children and their caregivers. Unpublished manuscript,
University of California at Santa Cruz.
Chiu, L.-H. (1972). A cross-cultural comparison of cognitive styles in
Chinese and American children. International Journal of Psychology, 7,
235-242.
Choi, I. (1998). The cultural psychology of surprise: Holistic theories,
contradiction, and epistemic curiosity. Unpublished doctoral dissertation. University of Michigan.
Choi, I., Dalai, R., & Kim-Prieto, C. (2000). Information search in causal
attribution: Analytic vs. holistic. Unpublished manuscript, University of
Illinois.
Choi, I., & Nisbett, R. E. (1998). Situational salience and cultural differences in the correspondence bias and in the actor-observer bias. Personality and Social Psychology Bulletin, 24, 949-960.
Choi, I., & Nisbett, R. E. (2000). The cultural psychology of surprise:
Holistic theories and recognition of contradiction. Journal of Personality
and Social Psychology, 79, 890-905.
Choi, I., Nisbett, R. E., & Norenzayan, A. (1999). Causal attribution across
cultures: Variation and universality. Psychological Bulletin, 125, 47-63.
Choi, I., Nisbett, R. E., & Smith, E. E. (1997). Culture, categorization and
inductive reasoning. Cognition, 65, 15-32.
Choi, S., & Gopnik, A. (1995). Early acquisition of verbs in Korean: A
cross-linguistic study. Journal of Child Language, 22, 497-529.
Cole, M. (1995). Socio-cultural-historical psychology: Some general remarks and a proposal for a new kind of cultural-genetic methodology. In
J. V. Wertsch, P. D. Ri'o, & A. Alvarez (Eds.), Sociocultural studies of
mind (pp. 113-144). Cambridge, England: Cambridge University Press.
Cole, M., & Scribner, S. (1974). Culture and thought: A psychological
introduction. New York: Wiley.
Cromer, A. (1993). Uncommon sense: The heretical nature of science.
New York: Oxford University Press.
D'Andrade, R. (1987). A folk model of the mind. In D. Holland & N.

308

NISBETT, PENG, CHOI, AND NORENZAYAN

Quinn (Eds.), Cultural models in language and thought (pp. 112-148).
New York: Cambridge University Press.
Darley, J. M, & Batson, C. D. (1973). From Jerusalem to Jericho: A study
of situational and dispositional variables in helping behavior. Journal of
Personality and Social Psychology, 27, 100-119.
Davis. M. (2000). Responses to weak argument on the part of Asians and
Americans. University of Michigan, Ann Arbor.
Davis. M.. Nisbett, R. E., & Schwarz, N. (2000). Responses to weak
arguments by Asians and Americans. Ann Arbor: University of
Michigan.
Dennett. D. C. (1995). Darwin's dangerous idea: Evolution and meanings
of life. New York: Simon & Schuster.
Dershowitz. Z. (1971). Jewish subcultural patterns and psychological differentiation. International Journal of Psychology, 6, 223-231.
Dyson, F. J. (1998, May 28). Is God in the lab? New York Review of Books,
8-10.
Fernald, A.. & Morikawa, H. (1993). Common themes and cultural variations in Japanese and American mothers' speech to infants. Child
Development, 64(3), 637-656.
Fischhoff. B. (1975). Hindsight/foresight: The effect of outcome knowledge on judgment under uncertainty. Journal of Experimental Psychology: Human Perception and Performance, I, 288-299.
Fiske, A. P., Kitayama, S., Markus. H. R., & Nisbett, R. E. (1998). The
cultural matrix of social psychology. In D. T. Gilbert, S. T. Fiske, & G.
Linzey (Eds.). Handbook of social psychology (4th ed., pp. 915-981).
Boston: McGraw-Hill.
Freeman, N. H., & Habermann, G. M. (1996). Linguistic socialization: A
Chinese perspective. In M. H. Bond (Ed.), The handbook of Chinese
psychology (pp. 79-92). Oxford, England: Oxford University Press.
Fung, Y. (1983). A history of Chinese philosophy (D. Bodde, Trans.) (Vol.
1-2). Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press.
Galtung, J. (1981). Structure, culture, and intellectual style: An essay
comparing saxonic, teutonic, gallic and nipponic approaches. Social
Science Information, 20, 817-856.
Garcia, J., McGowan, B. K.. Ervin. F., & Koelling, R. (1968). Cues: Their
relative effectiveness as reinforcers. Science, 160, 794-795.
Gelman, S. A. (1988). The development of induction within natural kind
and artifact categories. Cognitive Psychology, 20, 65-95.
Gelman, S. A., & Tardif, T. (1998). A cross-linguistic comparison of
generic noun phrases in English and Mandarin. Cognition, 66, 215-248.
Gilbert, D. T., & Malone, P. S. (1995). The correspondence bias. Psychological Bulletin, 117, 21-38.
Glass, D. C., & Singer, J. E. (1973). Experimental studies of uncontrollable
and unpredictable noise. Representative Research in Psychology, 4(1),
165-183.
Hadingham. E. (1994). The mummies of Xinjiang. Discover, 15(4), 68-77.
Hamilton, E. (1973). TV?*- Greek way. New York: Avon. (Original work
published 1930)
Hampden-Turner, C., & Trompenaars, A. (1993). The seven cultures of
capitalism: Value systems for creating wealth in the United States,
Japan, Germany, France, Britain, Sweden, and the Netherlands. New
York: Doubleday.
Hansen. C. (1983). Language and logic in ancient China. Ann Arbor:
University of Michigan Press.
Heath, S. B. (1982). What no bedtime story means: Narrative skills at home
and school. Language in Society, I I , 49-79.
Hedden, T., Ji, L., Jing, Q., Jiao, S., Yao, C., Nisbett, R. E., & Park, D. C.
(2000, April). Culture and age differences in recognition memory for
social dimensions. Paper presented at the Cognitive Aging Conference,
Atlanta, GA.
Hirschfeld. L. (1996). Race in the making: Cognition, culture, and the
child's construction of human kinds. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Hofstede, G. (1980). Culture's consequences: International differences in
work-related values. Beverley Hills, CA: Sage.
Hong. Y.. Chin. C., & Rung. T. (1997). Bringing culture out in front:

Effects of cultural meaning system activation on social cognition. In K.
Leung, Y. Kashima, U. Kim, & S. Yamaguchi (Eds.), Progress in Asian
social psychology (Vol. 1, pp. 135-146). Singapore: Wiley.
Hong, Y.-y., Morris, M. W., Chiu, C.-y., & Benet-Martinez, V. (2000).
Multicultural minds: A dynamic constructivist approach to culture and
cognition. American Psychologist, 55, 709-720.
Hsu, F. L. K. (1981). Americans and. Chinese: Passage to differences.
Honolulu: University of Hawaii Press.
Huang, J., & Chao, L. (1995). Chinese and American students' perceptual
styles of field independence versus field dependence. Perceptual and
Motor Skills, 80, 232-234.
Huff, T. E. (1993). The rise of early modern science: Islam, China, and the
West. Cambridge, England: Cambridge University Press.
Hutchins, E. (1995). Cognition in the wild. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Ji, L. (2001). Culture, language and relationships vs. categories in cognition. Unpublished doctoral dissertation, University of Michigan, Ann
Arbor.
Ji, L., & Nisbett, R. E. (2001). Culture, language and categories. Unpublished manuscript, University of Michigan.
Ji, L., Peng, K., & Nisbett, R. E. (2000). Culture, control, and perception
of relationships in the environment. Journal of Personality and Social
Psychology, 78, 943-955.
Jones, E. E., & Harris, V. A. (1967). The attribution of attitudes. Journal
of Experimental Social Psychology, 3, 1-24.
Kane, G. (2000). Culture and science. Unpublished manuscript, University
of Michigan.
Kemler-Nelson, D. G. (1984). The effect of intention on what concepts are
acquired. Journal of Verbal Learning and Verbal Behavior, 23, 734 759.
Kitayama, S., & Masuda, T. (1997). Shaiaiteki ninshiki no bunkateki baikai
model: taiousei bias no bunkashinrigakuteki kentou. [Cultural psychology of social inference: The correspondence bias in Japan]. In K.
Kashiwagi, S., Kitayama, & H. Azuma (Eds.), Bunkashinrigaju: riron to
jisho [Cultural psychology: Theory and evidence] (pp. 109-127). Tokyo: University of Tokyo Press.
Knox, B. (1990). Introduction to Homer's The Iliad (Robert Fagles,
Trans.). St. Paul, MN: Penguin-High Bridge.
Korzybyski, A. (1994). Science and sanity: An introduction to nonAristotelian systems and general semantics. Englewood, NJ: Institute of
General Semantics. (Original work published 1933)
Kuhnen, U., Hannover, B., Roder, U., Schubert, B., Shah, A. A., &
Zakaria, S. (2000). Cross-cultural variations in identifying embedded
figures: Comparisons from the US, Germany, Russia and Malaysia.
Unpublished manuscript, University of Michigan.
Kuhnen, U., Hannover, B., & Schubert, B. (2000). Procedural consequences of semantic priming: The role of self-knowledge for contextbounded versus context-independent modes of thinking. Unpublished
manuscript, University of Michigan.
Langer, E. (1975). The illusion of control. Journal of Personality and
Social Psychology, 32, 311-328.
Larrick, R. P., Nisbett, R. E., & Morgan, J. N. (1993). Who uses the
cost-benefit rules of choice? Implications for the normative status of
microeconomic theory. Organizational Behavior and Human Decision
Processes, 56, 331-347.
Lave, J. (1988). Cognition in practice: Mind, mathematics, and culture in
everyday life. New York: Cambridge University Press.
Lee, F., Hallahan, M., & Herzog, T. (1996). Explaining real life events:
How culture and domain shape attributions. Personality and Social
Psychology Bulletin, 22, 732-741.
Leslie, A. M. (1982). The perception of causality in infants. Perception, 11,
173-186.
Leslie, A. M. (1994). ToMM, ToBY, and agency: Core architecture and
domain specificity. In L. A. Hirschfeld & S. A. Gelman (Eds.), Mapping
the mind: Domain specificity in cognition and culture. Cambridge,
England: Cambridge University Press.

CULTURE AND THOUGHT
Leung, K., & Morris, M. W. (in press). Justice through the lens of culture
and ethnicity. In J. Sanders & V. L. Hamilton (Eds.), Handbook of law
and social science: Justice. New York: Plenum Press.
Lin, Y. (1936). My country and my people. London: William Heinemann.
Liu, S. H. (1974). The use of analogy and symbolism in traditional Chinese
philosophy. Journal of Chinese Philosophy, 1, 313-338.
Lloyd, G. E. R. (1990). Demystifying mentalities. New York: Cambridge
University Press.
Lloyd, G. E. R. (1991). The invention of nature. In G. E. R. Lloyd (Ed.),
Methods and problems in Greek Science (pp. 417-434). Cambridge,
England: Cambridge University Press.
Logan, R. F. (1986). The alphabet effect. New York: Morrow.
Lord, C., Ross, L., & Lepper, M. (1979). Biased assimilation and attitude
polarization: The effects of prior theories on subsequently considered
evidence. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 37, 20982109.
Lucy, J. A. (1992). Language diversity and thought: A reformulation of the
linguistic relativity hypothesis. New York: Cambridge University Press.
Luria, A. R. (1931). Psychological expedition to Central Asia. Science, 74,
383-384.
Mao, T.-T. (1962). Four essays on philosophy. Beijing, China: People's
Press. (Original work published 1937)
Markus, H. R., & Kitayama, S. (1991). Culture and the self: Implications
for cognition, emotion, and motivation. Psychological Review, 98, 224253.
Masuda, T. (1996). Bunkashinrigakutekuteki approach niyoru tashakoudousuiron process saikou: correspondence bisas no hunensei no kento.
[Rethinking the inference process about the other's behavior from a
cultural psychogical approach.]. Kyoto, Japan: Kyoto University.
Masuda, T., & Nisbett, R. E. (2001). Culture and attention to object vs.
field. Unpublished manuscript, University of Michigan.
Meizlik, F. (1973). Study of the effect of sex and cultural variables on field
independence/dependence in a Jewish sub-culture. Unpublished master's thesis. City University of New York.
Menon, T., Morris, M. W., Chiu, C.-y., & Hong, Y.-y. (1999). Culture and
the construal of agency: Attribution to individual versus group dispositions. Journal of Personality & Social Psychology, 76, 701-717.
Meyer, D. E. (1995). Adaptive executive control: Flexible multiple-task
performance without pervasive immutable response-selection bottlenecks. Acta Psychologica, 90, 163-190.
Meyer, D. E., & Kieras, D. E. (1997a). A computational theory of executive cognitive processes and multiple-task performance: I. Basic mechanisms. Psychological Review, 104, 3-65.
Meyer, D. E., & Kieras, D. E. (1997b). A computational theory of executive cognitive processes and multiple-task performance: II. Accounts of
psychological refractory-period phenomena. Psychological Review, 104,
749-791.
Meyer, D. E., & Kieras, D. E. (1999). Precis to a practical unified theory
of cognition and action: Some lessons from EPIC computational models
of human multiple-task performance. In D. Gopher (Ed.), Attention and
performance XVII: Cognitive regulation of performance: Interaction of
theory and application (Vol. 17-88). Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Miller, J. G. (1984). Culture and the development of everyday social
explanation. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 46, 961978.
Morris, M., Nisbett, R. E., & Peng, K. (1995). Causal understanding across
domains and cultures. In D. Sperber, D. Premack, & A. J. Premack
(Eds.), Causal cognition: A multidisciplinary debate (pp. 577-612).
Oxford, England: Oxford University Press.
Morris, M. W., & Peng, K. (1994). Culture and cause: American and
Chinese attributions for social and physical events. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 67, 949-971.
Moser, D. J. (1996). Abstract thinking and thought in ancient Chinese and
early Greek. Unpublished doctoral dissertation. University of Michigan,
Ann Arbor.

309

Munro, D. J. (1969). The concept of man in early China. Stanford, CA:
Stanford University Press.
Munro, D. J. (1985). Introduction. In D. Munro (Ed.), Individualism and
holism: Studies in Confucian and Taoist values (pp. 1-34). Ann Arbor:
Center for Chinese Studies, University of Michigan.
Nagashima, N. (1973). A reversed world: Or is it? In R. Horton & R.
Finnegan (Eds.), Modes of thought, (pp. 187-213). London: Faber and
Faber.
Nakamura, H. (1985). Ways of thinking of eastern peoples. Honolulu:
University of Hawaii Press. (Original work published 1964)
Needham, J. (1954). Science and civilisation in China (Vol. 1). Cambridge,
England: Cambridge University Press.
Needham, J. (1962). Science and civilisation in China. Vol. 4: Physics and
physical technology. Cambridge, England: Cambridge University Press.
Needham, J. (1978). The history of Chinese science and technology.
Chiu-lung, China: Chung Hua Shu Chu. (Original work published 1962)
Nisbett, R. E. (1993). Rules for reasoning. Hillsdale, NJ: Erlbaum.
Nisbett, R. E. (1998). Essence and accident. In J. Cooper & J. Darley
(Eds.), Attribution processes, person perception, and social interaction:
The legacy of Ned Jones (pp. 169-200). Washington, DC: American
Psychological Association.
Nisbett, R. E., Fong, G. T., Lehman, D. R., & Cheng, P. W. (1987).
Teaching reasoning. Science, 238, 625-631.
Nisbett, R. E., & Ross, L. D. (1980). Human inference: Strategies and
shortcomings of social judgment. Englewood Cliffs, NJ: Prentice Hall.
Norenzayan, A. (1999). Rule-based and experience-based thinking: The
cognitive consequences of intellectual traditions. Unpublished doctoral
dissertation, University of Michigan.
Norenzayan, A., Choi, L, & Nisbett, R. E. (1999). Eastern and western
perceptions of causality for social behavior: Lay theories about personalities and social situations. In D. Prentice & D. Miller (Eds.), Cultural
divides: Understanding and overcoming group conflict (pp. 239-272).
New York: Sage.
Norenzayan, A., Choi, I., & Nisbett, R. E. (2001). Eastern and Western folk
psychology and the prediction of behavior. Unpublished manuscript,
University of Illinois.
Norenzayan, A., Nisbett, R. E., Smith, E. E., & Kim, B. J. (2000). Rules vs.
similarity as a basis for reasoning and judgment in East and West.
Unpublished manuscript, University of Illinois.
Ohbuchi, K. I., & Takahashi, Y. (1994). Cultural styles of conflict management in Japanese and Americans: Passivity, covertness, and effectiveness of strategies. Journal of Applied Psychology, 24, 1345-1366.
On, L. W. (1996). The cultural context for Chinese learners: Conceptions
of learning in the Confucian tradition. In D. A. Watkins & J. B. Biggs
(Eds.), The Chinese learner: Cultural, psychological, and contextual
influences (pp. 142-156). Hong Kong, China: Comparative Education.
Osherson, D. N., Smith, E. E., Wilkie, O., Lopez, A., & Shafir, E. (1990).
Category-based induction. Psychological Review, 97, 185-200.
Park, D. C., Nisbett, R. E., & Hedden, T. (1999). Culture, cognition, and
aging. Journal of Gerontology, 54B, 75-84.
Peng, K. (1997). Naive dialecticism and its effects on reasoning and
judgment about contradiction. Unpublished doctoral dissertation, University of Michigan.
Peng, K., & Nisbett, R. E. (1999). Culture, dialectics, and reasoning about
contradiction. American Psychologist, 54, 741-754.
Peng, K., & Nisbett, R. E. (2000). Cross-cultural similarities and differences in the understanding of physical causality. Unpublished manuscript, University of California, Berkeley.
Resnick, L. B. (1994). Situated rationalism: Biological and social preparation for learning. In L. A. Hirschfeld & S. A. Gelman (Eds.), Mapping
the mind: Domain specificity in cognition and culture (pp. 474-494).
Cambridge, England: Cambridge University Press.
Riegel, K. F. (1973). Dialectical operations: The final period of cognitive
development. Human Development, 18, 430-443.

310

NISBETT. PENG, CHOI, AND NORENZAYAN

Rogoff. B. (1990). Apprenticeship in thinking: Cognitive development in
social context. New York: Oxford University Press.
Rogoff. B., Mistry, J.. Goncii. A.. & Mosier, C. (1993). Guided participation in cultural activity by toddlers and caregivers. Monographs of the
Society for Research in Child Development, 58(236).
Ross, L. (1977). The intuitive psychologist and his shortcomings. In L.
Berkowitz (Ed.), Advances in experimental social psychology (Vol. 10,
pp. 173-220). New York: Academic Press.
Saul. J. R. (1992). Voltaire's bastards: The dictatorship of reason in the
West. New York: Random House.
Seligman, M. E. P. (1970). On the generality of the laws of learning.
Psychological Review. 77. 127-190.
Shore, B. (1996). Culture in mind: Cognition, culture and the problem of
meaning. New York: Oxford University Press.
Shweder, R. A. (1991). Cultural psychology: What is it? In R. A. Shweder
(Ed.). Thinking through cultures: Expeditions in cultural psychology
(pp. 73-110). Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.
Sloman. S. (1993). Feature-based induction. Cognitive Psychology, 25,
231-280.
Sloman. S. (1996). The empirical case for two systems of reasoning.
Psychological Bulletin. 119, 30-52.
Smith, E. E., Langston, C., & Nisbett, R. E. (1992). The case for rules in
reasoning. Cognition, 16, 1-40.
Spelke, E. S. (1988). Where perceiving ends and thinking begins: The
apprehension of objects in infancy. In A. Yonas (Ed.), Perceptual
development in infancy. Minnesota Symposium on Child Psychology
(Vol. 20, pp. 191-234). Hillsdale, NJ: Erlbaum.
Spelke. E. S. (1990). Principles of object perception. Cognitive Science, 14,
29-56.
Sperber, D. (1985). Anthropology and psychology: Towards an epidemiology of representations (The Malinowski Memorial Lecture 1984). Man
(N.S.), 20, 73-89.
Sperber. D. (1996). Explaining culture: A naturalistic approach. Cambridge. MA: Blackwell.
Stich, S. (1990). The fragmentation of reason. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Tardif. T. (1996). Nouns are not always learned before verbs: Evidence
from Mandarin-speakers early vocabularies. Developmental Psychology,
J2(3), 492-504.
Tardif. T., Shatz, M., & Naigles, L. (1997). Caregiver speech and children's use of nouns versus verbs: A comparison of English, Italian and
Mandarin. Journal of Child Language, 24, 535-565.
Toulmin. S., & Goodfield, J. (1961)- The fabric of the heavens: The
development of astronomy and physics. New York: Harper and Row.
Triandis, H. C. (1972). The analysis of subjective culture. New York:
Wiley.
Triandis. H. C. (1995). Individualism and collectivism. Boulder, CO:
Westview Press.
Tweed, R. G., & Lehman, D. (2000). Learning considered within a cultural
context: Confucian and Socratic approaches. Unpublished manuscript,
University of British Columbia, Vancouver, Canada.

Vygotsky, L. S. (1978). Mind in society: The development of higher
psychological processes. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.
Vygotsky, L. S. (1987). The collected works ofL. S. Vygotsky (J. S. Bruner,
Trans.). New York: Plenum Press.
Wellman, H. M. (1990). The child's theory of mind. Cambridge, MA: MIT
Press.
Whiting, B. B., & Whiting, J. W. M. (1975). Children of six cultures: A
psycho-cultural analysis. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.
Whiting, J. W. M., & Child, I. L. (1953). Child training and personality:
A cross-cultural study. New Haven, CT: Yale University Press.
Witkin, H. A., & Berry, J. W. (1975). Psychological differentiation in
cross-cultural perspective. Journal of Cross Cultural Psychology, 6,
4-87.
Witkin, H. A., Dyk, R. B., Faterson, H. F., Goodenough, D. R., & Karp,
S. A. (1974). Psychological differentiation. Potomac, MD: Erlbaum.
Witkin, H. A., & Goodenough, D. R. (1977). Field dependence and
interpersonal behavior. Psychological Bulletin, 84, 661-689.
Witkin, H. A., Lewis, H. B., Hertzman, M., Machover, K., Meissner, P. B.,
& Karp, S. A. (1954). Personality through perception. New York:
Harper.
Witkin, H. A., Price-Williams, D., Bertini, M., Christiansen, B., Oltman,
P. K., Ramirez, M., & Van Meel, J. (1974). Social conformity and
psychological differentiation. International Journal of Psychology, 9,
11-29.
Xia, C. (1997). Decision-making factors in Go expertise. Unpublished
doctoral dissertation, New Mexico State University, Las Cruces.
Yamagushi, S., Gelfand, M., Mizuno, M., & Zemba, Y. (1997). Illusion of
collective control or illusion of personal control: Biased judgment about
a chance event in Japan and the U.S. Paper presented at the Second
Conference of the Asian Association of Social Psychology, Kyoto,
Japan.
Yang, S. (1988). History of Chinese thoughts on logic. Ganshu, China:
People's Press of Ganshu.
Yates, J. R, & Curley, S. P. (1996). Contingency judgment: Primacy
effects and attention decrement. Acta Psychologica, 62, 293-302.
Yu, Y.-s. (1985). Individualism and the Neo-Taoist movement in Wei-Chin
China. In D. Munro (Ed.), Individualism and holism: Studies in Confucian and Taoist values (pp. 121-156). Ann Arbor: Center for Chinese
Studies, University of Michigan.
Zhang, D. L. (1985). The concept of "Tian Ren He Yi" in Chinese
philosophy. Beijing University Journal, I, 8.
Zhang, D. L., & Chen, Z. Y. (1991). Zhongguo Siwei Pianxiang (The
orientation of Chinese thinking). Beijing: Social Science Press.
Zhou, G. X. (1990). Chinese traditional philosophy. Beijing: Beijing
Normal University Press.

Received June 25, 1999
Revision received July 1, 2000
Accepted July 10, 2000 •

