This article was downloaded by: [McGill University Library]
On: 26 December 2012, At: 10:58
Publisher: Routledge
Informa Ltd Registered in England and Wales Registered Number: 1072954 Registered
office: Mortimer House, 37-41 Mortimer Street, London W1T 3JH, UK

Educational Psychology: An
International Journal of Experimental
Educational Psychology
Publication details, including instructions for authors and
subscription information:
http://www.tandfonline.com/loi/cedp20

On the Nature of Cognitive Style
Richard J. Riding

a

a

Assessment Research Unit, University of Birmingham, UK
Version of record first published: 25 Nov 2010.

To cite this article: Richard J. Riding (1997): On the Nature of Cognitive Style, Educational
Psychology: An International Journal of Experimental Educational Psychology, 17:1-2, 29-49
To link to this article: http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/0144341970170102

PLEASE SCROLL DOWN FOR ARTICLE
Full terms and conditions of use: http://www.tandfonline.com/page/terms-andconditions
This article may be used for research, teaching, and private study purposes. Any
substantial or systematic reproduction, redistribution, reselling, loan, sub-licensing,
systematic supply, or distribution in any form to anyone is expressly forbidden.
The publisher does not give any warranty express or implied or make any
representation that the contents will be complete or accurate or up to date. The
accuracy of any instructions, formulae, and drug doses should be independently
verified with primary sources. The publisher shall not be liable for any loss, actions,
claims, proceedings, demand, or costs or damages whatsoever or howsoever caused
arising directly or indirectly in connection with or arising out of the use of this
material.

Educational Psychology, Vol. 17, Nos 1 and 2, 1997

29

Downloaded by [McGill University Library] at 10:58 26 December 2012

On the Nature of Cognitive Style

R I C H A R D J. RIDING, Assessment Research Unit, University of Birmingham,

UK

ABSTRACT
This paper reviews the origins of the construct of cognitive style, its fundamental dimensions and their method of assessment. The evidence for the independence of the style
dimensions from one another, from intelligence and from personality is presented. The relationship of style to observed behaviours, such as learning performance, learning preferences, subject
preferences and social behaviour, is described. Physiological measures and their relationship to
style are considered. The distinction between style, which is likely to be relatively fixed, and
strategies which are capable of being learned and developed, is discussed. A 'level' model is then
outlined with, at the primary level: experience, personality sources and gender. Styles operate
at the next level of cognitive control. The outer output level comprises the learning strategies.
Priorities for further research are outlined.

This paper will consider the nature of the construct of cognitive style, its assessment
and its relationship to behaviour.

Cognitive Style and its Assessment
The Origins of the Construct of Cognitive Style

Early in the scientific study of psychology, attention was given to the notion that some
people have a predominantly verbal way of representing information in thought, while
others are more visual or imaginal (e.g. Galton, 1883; James, 1890) and this was
continued by Bartlett (1932).
Between the early 1940s and the 1980s, various investigators observed what they felt
represented style dimensions. However, the researchers generally worked in their own
contexts, in isolation from one another, developed their own instruments for assessment and gave their own labels to the style they were studying with little reference to
the work of others. Not surprisingly, this led to the development of a large variety of
style labels. A number of workers suggested that many of these were but different
conceptions of the same dimensions (e.g. Coan, 1974; Fowler, 1980; Brumby, 1982;
0144-3410/97/01-2/0029-21 © 1997 Carfax Publishing Ltd

Downloaded by [McGill University Library] at 10:58 26 December 2012

30

R. J. Riding

Miller, 1987; Riding & Buckle, 1990). Riding and Cheema (1991) found over 30 labels
and, after reviewing the descriptions, correlations, methods of assessment and effect on
behaviour, concluded that they could be grouped into two principal cognitive style
dimension: the Wholist-Analytic and the Verbal-Imagery. A further review by Rayner
and Riding (this issue) supported this conclusion.
The two basic dimensions of cognitive style may be summarised as follows:
(1) The Wholist-Analytic Style dimension of whether an individual tends to process
information in wholes or parts.
(2) The Verbal-Imagery Style dimension of whether an individual is inclined to
represent information during thinking verbally or in mental pictures.
Cognitive style has been denned by Tennant (1988) "an individual's characteristic and
consistent approach to organising and processing information".

Style Versus Ability
An important aspect of this notion is that of style in contrast to simple ability. What are
the characteristics of style that distinguish it from ability? Both style and ability will
affect performance on a given task. The basic distinction between them is that
performance on all tasks will improve as ability increases, whereas the effect of style on

The Nature of Cognitive Styles

31

performance for an individual will either be positive or negative depending on the
nature of the task. It follows from this that for an individual at one end of a style
dimension, a task of a type they find difficult will be found easier by someone at the
other end of the dimension, and vice versa. For instance, if the dimension were the
Verbal-Imagery style, then Verbalisers would find pictorial tasks more difficult than
would Imagers, but they would find highly verbal tasks easier than would Imagers. In
other words, in terms of style a person is both good and poor at tasks depending on the
nature of the task, while for intelligence, they are either good or poor.

Downloaded by [McGill University Library] at 10:58 26 December 2012

Assessment of Cognitive Style
Two general approaches to assessment have been used to study style: (a) introspective
self-report and (b) tests of information processing, on the assumption that performance
is facilitated by style.
(a) Self-report. A questionnaire, the Cognitive Style Index (Allinson & Hayes, 1996),
probably assesses a dimension related to the Wholist-Analytic dimension. For the
Verbal-Imagery dimension, Paivio (1971) devised the Individual Differences Questionnaire comprising 86 true/false item statements (47 for assessing the strength of preference in the verbal mode and 39 for the imagery mode). A development of this using
differences in lateral eye movement was the Verbalizer-Visualizer Questionnaire (see,
for instance, Richardson, 1994, pp. 35-37).
However, introspective self-report measures have inherent weaknesses. These include the subject's (i) possible inability to report their behaviour accurately and
objectively, (ii) unwillingness to make the necessary effort to respond accurately and
(iii) bias due to the pressure of social desirability in making responses (see, for instance,
Kline, 1995, p. 512).
(b) Measurement of Information Processing. In terms of the Wholist-Analytic dimension,
Witkin et al. (1971) produced the Embedded Figures Test (EFT), which required
subjects to find simple geometrical figures within more complex ones in a given time.
This was designed to assess field-dependence-independence and it was assumed that
field-independent individuals would be able to do items more quickly than field-dependent ones. However, no subtest was used that the field-dependent individuals were
likely to perform better on than the field-independent ones. As overall performance will
also be affected by general ability or 'intelligence', it may be objected that the EFT
assesses intelligence rather than style (see, for instance, Goldstein & Blackman, 1978,
pp. 183-184; Flexer & Roberge, 1980; Riding & Pearson, 1994).
With the Verbal-Imagery dimension, Delaney (1978) used tests of both verbal and
spatial ability. However, the results were used separately and not in combination, by
means of a ratio or a difference.
The approach used by Riding (1991a) in developing the Cognitive Styles Analysis
(CSA) was to assess performance on simple tasks that might then be representative of
processing generally, with the intention of measuring an individual's position on both
the Wholist-Analytic and the Verbal-Imagery dimensions. This was a development of
the earlier work of Riding and Taylor (1976), Riding and Ashmore (1980), Riding and
Calvey (1981) and Riding et al. (1989). The background to the development of the
Cognitive Styles Analysis is given in Riding and Cheema (1991).

Downloaded by [McGill University Library] at 10:58 26 December 2012

32

R. J. Riding

The CSA is computer presented and directly assesses both ends of the Wholist-Analytic and Verbal-Imagery dimensions, and comprises three subtests. The first assesses
the Verbal-Imagery dimension by presenting 48 statements one at a time to be judged
true or false. Half of the statements contain information about conceptual categories,
while the rest describe the appearance of items. Half of the statements of each type are
true. It was assumed that Imagers would respond more quickly to the appearance
statements, because the objects could be readily represented as mental pictures and the
information for the comparison could be obtained directly and rapidly from these
images. In the case of the conceptual category items, it was assumed that Verbalisers
would have a shorter response time because the semantic conceptual category membership is verbally abstract in nature and cannot be represented in visual form. The
computer records the response time to each statement and calculates the VerbalImagery Ratio. A low ratio indicates a Verbaliser and a high ratio an Imager, with the
intermediate position being described as Bimodal. It may be noted that in this approach
individuals have to read both the verbal and the imagery items so that reading ability
and reading speed are controlled for.
The second two subtests assess the Wholist-Analytic dimension. The first of these
presents items containing pairs of complex geometrical figures which the individual is
required to judge either the same or different. As this task involves judgements about
the overall similarity of the two figures, it was assumed that a relatively fast response to
this task would be possible by Wholists. The second presents items each comprising a
simple geometrical shape (e.g. a square or a triangle) and a complex geometrical figure,
and the individual is asked to indicate whether or not the simple shape is contained in
the complex one by pressing one of the two marked response keys. This task requires
a degree of disembedding of the simple shape from within the complex geometrical
figure in order to establish that it is the same as the stimulus simple shape displayed:
it was assumed that Analytics would be relatively quicker at this. Again, the computer
records the latency of the responses and calculates the Wholist-Analytic Ratio. A low
ratio corresponds to a Wholist and a high ratio to an Analytic. Ratios between these
positions are labelled Intermediate. It should be noted that each style dimension is a
continuum and subsequently labels will only be attached to ranges on a dimension for
convenience.
The CSA provides a simple, quick and convenient means of assessing an individual's
position on the two fundamental cognitive style dimensions (see Riding, 1991b). The
instrument has several advantages:

(a) It is an objective test, as defined by Cattell and Warburton (1967), as it is
objectively scored and its method of assessment is not obviously apparent to
those being assessed. It is consequently difficult for assessees to contrive their
results.
(b) It positively assesses both ends of the style dimension. This is important, as
otherwise it could be objected that the assessment is simply of ability.
(c) As it does not contain ^questionnaire-type items, or difficult language, it can be
used with a wide age-range from children to adults.
(d) It is context free and can be used in a wide range of situations, such as schools,
industry and the health service.
(c) It is probably culture free in nature and it has been used in a number of countries
[1].

The Nature of Cognitive Styles

33

Evidence for the Validity of Style as a Construct

Downloaded by [McGill University Library] at 10:58 26 December 2012

For a style measure to be shown to possess a degree of construct validity, several
conditions need to be fulfilled. These will include the following. The style dimensions
should be:
(1) independent of one another;
(2) separate from intelligence;
(3) independent of personality;
(4) related to observed behaviours, such as (a) learning performance, (b) learning
preferences, (c) subject preferences and (d) social behaviour;
(5) related to physiological measures; and
(6) such that they fulfil the requirements of a 'style'.
This consideration of style will be limited to studies using the Cognitive Styles Analysis
approach [2].
(1) The Independence of the Style Dimensions

The two cognitive style dimensions are independent of one another, in that the position
of an individual on one dimension does not affect their position on the other.
Correlation between the two dimensions has been found to be consistently low and
typically r = ±0.1 (e.g. Riding & Douglas 1993; Riding et al, 1995).
Gender Differences. There do not appear to be overall gender differences with respect to
cognitive style. Differences are usually small and nonsignificant on both dimensions
(p<0.05) (e.g. Riding et al., 1995).
Age Differences. No longitudinal studies of the effect of age by assessing subjects at
different ages have been undertaken. However, where samples were from a wide
age-range, no significant correlation between age and style was observed. For example,
with a sample of nurses aged 21-61 years, the correlations between age and WholistAnalytic style and Verbal-Imager style, were, respectively, r = 0.00 and r = 0.01 (from
the data collected by Riding & Wheeler, 1995).
(2) Style and Intelligence

Cognitive style appears to be independent of intelligence. Riding and Pearson (1994),
with a sample of 119 12-13-year-old pupils, found that intelligence as measured by the
subtests of the British Abilities Scale was not related to cognitive style. The correlations
between the four subtests used and the Wholist-Analytic and Verbal-Imagery ratios
were all low and nonsignificant and were, respectively: Digits — 0.01, 0.12; Similarities
- 0 . 0 3 , 0.01; Matrices - 0 . 1 0 , 0.04; Speed of Information Processing 0.07, 0.02.
Similar findings came from a Canadian study (Riding & Agrell, submitted) of the
relationship between style and the Canadian Test of Cognitive Skills (CTCS) with 205
14-16-year-old students. The CTCS comprises four subtests containing intelligence
test-type items. These together with the respective correlations with the Wholist-Analytic and Verbal-Imagery ratios were: Sequences 0.01, - 0 . 1 0 ; Analogies - 0 . 0 1 ,
- 0 . 0 5 ; Memory - 0 . 0 3 , - 0 . 0 3 ; Verbal Reasoning - 0 . 0 2 - 0 . 1 0 . Again, all the
correlations were very low. This study did, however, indicate an interaction between

34

R. J. Riding

style and intelligence in their effect on school achievement, such that style was more
critical where pupils were of lower ability and the subject matter did not ideally suit
their style. For instance, the difference in performance between high and low ability
pupils was greater for the Analytic-Imagers than the Analytic-Verbalisers, where in the
latter case that style was more naturally suited to learning academic subjects.

Downloaded by [McGill University Library] at 10:58 26 December 2012

(3) Personality and Style
Riding and Wigley (submitted) in a study of 340 College of Further Education students
aged 17-18 years used a range of questionnaire measures of personality and attitude,
for comparison with cognitive style, and these included: (a) EPQ-R Short Scale
(Eysenck & Eysenck, 1991) Extraversion, Neuroticism and Psychoticism; (b) IVE
Questionnaire (Eysenck and Eysenck, 1991) Impulsiveness, Venturesomeness and
Empathy, and (c) State and Trait Anxiety Inventory (Spielberger, 1977). A principal
components factor analysis with oblique rotation gave four factors which were labelled:
Anxiety, Impulsiveness, Empathy, and Style. No personality measure loaded beyond
± 0.33 on Style.
They also considered the interactive effect of Wholist-Analytic style and Verbal-Imagery style on personality measures. They found significant effects such that with
Neuroticism, Wholist-Verbalisers and Analytic-Imagers were more anxious than Analytic-Verbalisers and Wholist-Imagers. With Impulsiveness, Wholist-Verbalisers and
Analytic-Imagers were more impulsive/decisive than Analytic-Verbalisers and WholistImagers. They proposed a tentative model in which physiologically based personality
sources are independent of cognitive style but are moderated by style in their effect on
behaviour.
(4) Cognitive Styles and Behaviour
The relationship between cognitive style and the following behaviours will be reviewed:
(a) Learning Performance, (b) Learning Preferences, (c) Subject Preferences and (d)
Social Behaviour.
(a) Style and Learning Performance. This section will consider the effect on
learning performance of the interaction between style and the way the instructional
material is structured, its mode of presentation, its type of content, as well as academic
achievement.
The Structure of the Material. Several studies have found that an individual's position on
the Wholist-Analytic dimension interacts with the structure of the learning material to
affect performance. When presented with a prose passage for recall, Douglas and
Riding (1993) found that with 77 11-year-old pupils, Wholists did best when the title
of the passage was given before the passage was presented, rather than at the end,
although this had little effect for Analytics. The result was interpreted as due to the
Wholists being less able to structure material, being helped by a title at the beginning
to give some organisation to the material.
Riding and Sadler-Smith (1992) compared performance on two versions of computer-presented instructional material on central heating systems with 129 14-19-yearold students. The two versions presented that same information, but one also contained
an introduction to the five topics and each topic had a short overview at the start and

Downloaded by [McGill University Library] at 10:58 26 December 2012

The Nature of Cognitive Styles

35

a summary at the end. In addition, there was an overall summary at the end of the five
topics. This treatment slightly improved recall performance for Analytic-Verbalisers
and Wholist-Imagers, but the additional material reduced performance for the other
two styles, Wholist-Verbalisers and Analytic-Imagers. This was explained in terms of a
lack on the part of the Analytic-Verbalisers of a facility to obtain a whole view, and of
the Wholist-Imagers to be able readily to analyse the information into its structure. For
these styles, the overview and summaries provided these to some extent. By contrast,
the Wholist-Verbalisers and the Analytic-Imagers had some facility to do this for
themselves and the additional material was therefore redundant and depressed performance.
Riding and Al-Sanabani (in prep.) with a sample of 200 10-15-year-old pupils
studied the effect on recall performance of a short summary placed either before or after
a main prose passage. The presence of a summary helped both Verbalisers and Imagers.
However, for the younger pupils (10-12 years), the Verbalisers were most helped with
the summary before, and the Imagers with it after. By contrast, with the older pupils
(13-15 years) the Imagers gained most by having the summary first, and the Verbalisers
with it second. Put another way, there was only a relatively small improvement in
performance with age for the Verbalisers on the material with a summary, while there
was a much greater change with the Imagers. This shift may have been due to the ways
in which the styles developed learning strategies with age and, particularly, that the
Imagers had found ways of coping more effectively with verbal material.
Riding and Adams (in prep.) with 84 12-year-old pupils considered the effect of
context generated by Direct and Indirect antecedents on the response time to judging
statements. An example of both is shown below. For each condition, the sentences were
computer presented one at a time. When the pupil had understood a sentence a key was
pressed. In the case of the last sentence, the pupil indicated whether it was true or false
by pressing one of two marked keys.
DIRECT ANTECEDENT
(1) June was happy lying
in the hot sun.

INDIRECT ANTECEDENT
(1) June joined the other
bathers on the beach

(2) As a result she got mildly
sunburnt
(3) The sun can burn people
They found that in the case of the Indirect and Direct antecedents, the Verbalisers were
faster than the Imagers. The reason for this was probably that Imagers take longer than
Verbalisers because their habitual mode of processing is to generate mental pictures and
these do not help in judging the final statement: while for the Verbalisers, the semantic
area related to the statement is likely to be activated, facilitating a quick response. In
all cases, except that of the Analytic-Verbalisers in the Direct condition, the Analytics
took longer than the Wholists, perhaps because their processing is more exhaustive and
considers a wide range of options. However, for the Analytic-Verbalisers in the Direct
condition, they would have been able to use the context to guide them quickly to the
properties of the objects mentioned and they would have been able more quickly to
make the logical inferences, as they were more focused. In a sense, they could more
quickly disembed the main idea suggested by the context. By contrast, in the more

36

R. J. Riding

Downloaded by [McGill University Library] at 10:58 26 December 2012

diffuse Indirect contexts the Analytics could have generated too many possibilities and,
hence, were slower than the Wholists who probably just waited for the question.
In summary, Wholists will benefit from help in structuring the material, while
Analytics should be able to impose their own structure upon it.
Mode of Presentation. Two modes of presentation are available: the verbal and the
pictorial. Riding and Ashmore (1980) with 74 11-year-old pupils presented groups of
Verbalisers and Imagers (as assessed by the earlier Verbal-Imagery Code Test) with
either a verbal or a pictorial version of the same information. They found that
Verbalisers were superior with the verbal version and Imagers when learning in the
pictorial mode. Within the instructional context, while purely verbal presentation is
often possible, an alternative purely pictorial version is rarely an option as some words
will also be necessary. However, it will usually be feasible to present information in both
modes to some extent. Riding and Douglas (1993), with 59 15-16-year-old students,
found that the computer presentation of material on motor car braking systems in a
text-plus-picture format facilitated the learning by Imagers compared to the same
content in a text-plus-text version. They further found that at recall in the text-plus-picture condition 50% of the Imagers used illustrations as part of their answers compared
to only 12% of the Verbalisers.
Generally, Imagers learn best from pictorial presentations, while Verbalisers learn
best from verbal presentations. It is also likely that lecturers and teachers will reflect
their own style in the ways in which the present information, such that, for instance,
Verbalisers will use a highly verbal content, while Imagers will use pictures and
diagrams to illustrate their words. This is worthy of further study.
Style and Representational Control. Riding and Dyer (1980) distinguished between two
levels of control of verbal and imagery performance: voluntary and involuntary. They
suggested that, in the former, the individual makes a deliberate and conscious decision
to generate an image or verbal response, while, in the latter, the image or verbal
representation occurs spontaneously without conscious effort. In the present context, it
may be argued that Verbalisers do not use images greatly during involuntary information processing, although they can generate them successfully by conscious effort.
By contrast, Imagers habitually use involuntary imagery as a means of representing
information. Further, for Imagers, mental pictures are likely to be less stable than those
produced by Verbalisers as they will be liable to interference and displacement by
further involuntary intrusive images. It may follow that the converse applies to Verbalisers and Imagers with respect to verbal associations, and that Verbalisers find that verbal
associations tend to be less stable for them than they would be when consciously evoked
by Imagers.
Douglas and Riding (1994), with 71 11-year-old pupils, studied drawing performance. The pupils were asked to draw two pictures, one from memory and one from a
picture. Judges rated the drawings of the Verbalisers as significantly better than those
of the Imagers. It may be that the fluid mental pictures of the Imagers interfered with
the external representations.
It may well follow from this that, in the case of individuals of the same ability and
similar on the Wholist-Analytic dimension, the Verbalisers are superior in speech which
benefits from involuntary verbal fluency and relatively inferior in writing where the lack
of verbal control due to spontaneous involuntary verbal associations may be a hin-

The Nature of Cognitive Styles

37

Downloaded by [McGill University Library] at 10:58 26 December 2012

drance. By contrast, Imagers may be superior in written mode, but inferior in the
spoken mode. This possibility awaits investigation.
Type of Content. In the case of the type of content of learning material, studies of 11and 12-year-old pupils indicated that Imagers recall highly visually descriptive text
better than acoustically complex and unfamiliar text, while the reverse holds for
Verbalisers (Riding & Dyer, 1980; Riding & Calvey, 1981). Initial reading performance, which is obviously a very verbal task, has been found to be superior in Verbalisers.
Riding and Anstey (1982), with 40 7-year-old children, assessed reading accuracy and
comprehension and found that both declined from Verbaliser to Imager. Riding and
Mathias (1991), with 80 11-year-olds, observed that for reading accuracy this effect was
still very pronounced for Wholists, where Wholist-Verbalisers showed much greater
proficiency at reading compared to Wholist-Imagers.
In terms of content type, individuals appear to learn best when information can be
readily translated into their preferred Verbal-Imagery mode of representation.
Educational Achievement. The study of educational achievement and style poses problems. These derive from the nature of the subject, the ways in which it has been taught
and the methods of assessment. A subject usually varies considerably within itself in
terms of the type of content and the range of processing required. The method of
instruction will vary from teacher to teacher and probably be a reflection of their styles.
Further, the form of assessment can be varying proportions of course work and unseen
examination, and can also vary in mode (verbal/pictorial).
Riding and Caine (1993) looked at the performance of 182 pupils in the General
Certificate of Secondary Education (GCSE) (the British public examination at 16
years) in Mathematics, English Language and French. Overall, the Intermediate-Bimodals did well in all three subjects. There were also significant interactions between style
and subject on performance, but the patterns obtained were not easy to interpret,
probably for the reasons given above.
(b) Style and Learning Preference. Two methods of assessing learning preferences
have been used: (i) self-report and (ii) observed behaviour choices.
Self-report Measures. In an investigation by Riding and Read (1996), 78 12-year-old
pupils were individually questioned about their preferences in the subjects of English
language and science with respect to mode of working and social context. With mode
of working, in the case of the higher ability pupils, Imagers, particularly if they are
Wholists, reported that they used less writing and more pictures than Verbalisers,
especially where the subject allowed, as in science. The tendency by Imagers to use
pictures, and Verbalisers writing, increased with ability. There was evidence that lower
ability pupils were more constrained by the usual format of the subject than were those
of higher ability.
The preferences for group, pair and individual working were that all pupils reported
that they preferred group or pair work to individual work, and group work was
particularly liked by Wholists, and especially by lower ability Wholist-Imagers. Individual work was least disliked by Analytics, particularly in the case of higher ability
Verbalisers.
Sadler-Smith and Riding (submitted), used a questionnaire approach to study
instructional preferences in 245 university business studies students. In terms of locus

38

R. J. Riding

Downloaded by [McGill University Library] at 10:58 26 December 2012

of control, the Analytics preferred to have control themselves rather than to be
controlled, while the Wholists had no preference.
The self-report approach suffers from the limitations mentioned above in the section
considering the assessment of style. While questionnaire approaches have some uses,
where possible observation of real behaviour is likely to be more relevant.

Observed Behaviour Choices. In a study by Riding and Watts (this issue), 90 female
16-year-old pupils were told within their class groups that three versions of a sheet
giving information on study skills had been prepared for them, and that each sheet
contained the same information but that the formats were different. They were then
invited to come one at a time to the front of the class and to take one of the versions
from the teacher's desk. Their choices were noted by the teacher. The versions were
unstructured-verbal (paragraphs, without headings), structured-verbal (paragraphs,
each with a clear heading) and structured-pictorial (paragraphs, each with a clear
heading and a pictorial icon depicting the activity placed in the left margin). No pupils
chose the unstructured-verbal version. With the two structured versions, there was a
significant interaction with Verbal-Imagery style with the majority of the Verbalisers
selecting the verbal version and most of the Imagers the pictorial. On the WholistAnalytic dimension, the pictorial version was more attractive to the Wholists, perhaps
because it looked more 'lively', while with the Analytics there was a slight preference for
the more 'neat and tidy' verbal format. The results suggested that pupils are attracted
to, and prefer to select, materials that appear to suit their own style.

(c) Subject Preferences. Riding and Staley (submitted) gave a questionnaire to 204
university business studies students which assessed their preferences about the content
and presentation of their courses. For analysis the courses were grouped as, Information Technology, Accounting (accountancy and quantitative methods, as both of
these composed largely of numerical concepts and computation) and Management
(organisational behaviour and business workshop, both of which were concerned with
the running of organisations). On the Wholist-Analytic dimension, Intermediates were
least happy with Accounting and Information Technology and most happy with
Management. For Accountancy and Information Technology, in terms of being positive about the courses, having a clear overview of the courses, least needing content
overviews, finding the presentation order logical and liking the tutor's style, Wholists
were highest in their ratings, followed by the Analytics, with the Intermediates having
the lowest ratings. Accounting and Information Technology requires, on the one hand,
the capacity for an overall view of the processes and their purposes, and on the other,
the methodological following of rules. Wholists fit the first requirement and Analytics
the latter. Intermediates tend to alternate between both, which is useful for a more
creative approach, but does not consistently give either.
With Management, it was Intermediates who were most positive, generally found the
presentation order logical and most liked the tutor's style. Wholists, in particular, rated
these less highly. Management requires a more creative approach, requiring more
problem-solving activities, which suits the Intermediates more than the Wholists.
With respect to the Wholist-Analytic dimension, when performance was considered
it was noted that individuals underestimated their performance on the subjects that did
not suit their style and overestimated it on those that did.

Downloaded by [McGill University Library] at 10:58 26 December 2012

The Nature of Cognitive Styles

39

(d) Style and Social Behaviour. As cognitive style affects the ways in which an
individual thinks about and internally represents situations in the external world, it is
reasonable to expect that it might also be related to aspects of social behaviour.
The Wholist-Analytic style was derived from a family of styles which includes
field-dependence-independence. Witkin et al. (1979) considered the effects of this
dimension on aspects of personality related to the perception of self and nonself.
They argued that self-nonself segregation increases with field-independence (see also
Korchin, 1986). Riding (1991b) has suggested that the Wholist-Analytic style will be
reflected socially in such dimensions as being dependent-self reliant, flexible-consistent,
realistic-idealistic, vague-organised. Wholists will tend to the first mentioned extreme
and Analytics the other.
In line with Huckabee (1974) and Schwartz (1975), Riding and Wicks (1978) found
results on learning tasks consistent with the interpretation that Verbalisers would be
extraverts and Imagers introverts. With 12-year-old children, Riding and Dyer (1980)
found a correlation of — 0.67 for boys and — 0.76 for girls between an earlier measure
of Verbal-Imagery style (using the Verbal-Imagery Code Test) and introversionextraversion. As discussed in the section on Personality and Style, it is, however, not
simply that extraversion-introversion and Verbaliser-Imager are respectively the social
and cognitive manifestations of the same underlying mechanism. There are, however,
aspects of the Verbal-Imagery dimension that affect social behaviour, as this dimension
influences the focus and type of an individual's activity, externally and stimulating in
the case of Verbalisers, and internally and more passive for Imagers.
Social Relationships. Riding and Wright (1995) asked 149 undergraduate students living
in university flats, with typically five per flat, to rate their flatmates in terms of personal
characteristics. The Wholists were rated as more assertive, humorous and helpful, while
the Analytics were seen as more shy. Further, the degree of unity in each flat was
assessed by rating questions such as, "Relations in my accommodation have been
harmonious." When compared to the majority style in each flat, the order of reported
unity from least to highest was: Analytic-Imager, Wholist-Imager, Analytic-Verbaliser,
Wholist-Verbaliser. This order was as expected as Analytics are likely to be more
separate than Wholists and Imagers are likely to be more inward and detached than
Verbalisers.
Riding et al. (1995) asked 12-year-old pupils to rate the children in their class in
terms of being Active (outgoing, lively, humorous), Modest (shy, quiet) and Responsible (serious, patient). They found Verbalisers highest on Active, Bimodals highest on
Modest and that Responsibleness increased from Verbaliser to Imager.
Behaviour Problems. Riding and Craig (submitted) assessed the style of 83 10-18-yearold pupils in two residential special schools to which the pupils had been referred
because of behaviour problems. The percentage of pupils in the Wholist-Analytic
dimension style groupings as defined by a control sample was Wholists 46%, Intermediates 34% and Analytics 20%. Rayner and Riding (1996) studied 17 15-17-year-old
pupils attending a Truancy Unit because of their previous failure to attend school.
Again, comparison with a control sample showed a significant difference on the
Wholist-Analytic dimension with Wholists 41%, Intermediates 53% and Analytics 6%.
The high proportion of Wholists with problem behaviour might possibly be related to
a lack of strong internal control on the part of Wholists if they are then in a situation

40

R. J. Riding

Downloaded by [McGill University Library] at 10:58 26 December 2012

where there is insufficient structure and parental discipline within their home environment.
Stress and Aspect of Occupation. Borg and Riding (1993) gave a sample 212 Maltese
secondary school teachers a stress questionnaire. This indicated that the amount of
stress reported was in line with the expectation of Wholists being more open and people
orientated, and Analytics being more structured and organised. The Wholists reported
more stress from time pressures and staff relations, while the Analytics found pupil
misbehaviour and working conditions more stressful.
Riding and Wheeler (1995), in a study of 204 nurses, found that Verbalisers had a
significantly higher grade than Imagers. Further, they found evidence that the type of
nursing that most suited nurses was related to their style. A questionnaire was used to
assess their reported level of stress and of general satisfaction with their job. A
Suitability Index was obtained from (satisfaction minus stress) and this was compared
with their style and type of nursing. The styles with the highest and lowest indices on
three types of nursing are shown below.

Type of nursing and style
Suitability
Level

General

Orthopaedic

Psychiatric

Highest
Lowest

Analytic-Verbaliser
Wholist-Imager

Intermediate-Bimodals
Analytic-Imager

Wholist-Imagers
Intermediate-Verbaliser

It could be argued that General Nursing is dynamic, requiring conscientious activity,
Orthopaedic nursing is slower needing patience, and Psychiatric Nursing is demanding
benefiting from tolerance.
This approach could usefully be applied to other occupations.
(5) Style and Physiological Mechanisms
Riding et al. (1993) reviewed work on EEG and verbal and imagery processing. They
suggested that for the Verbal-Imagery dimension, EEG alpha suppression (indicating
mental activity) during information processing would occur over the left hemisphere for
Verbalisers and over the right for Imagers. With respect to the Wholist-Analytic
dimension, no clear prediction was made other that it would not be in terms of
left-right hemispheric specialisation.
Riding et al. (1997) reported a study of EEG and style which recorded EEG alpha
in 15 subjects ranging in age form 18 to 36 years, while they did computerpresented word targeting tasks in which words appeared one at a time on the screen at
a rate of two, five and 10 words/second, and in pairs at five and 10 word-pairs/second.
The task required subjects to monitor the displayed words and respond with a button
press whenever a noun from the superordinate categories of 'fruit' or 'vegetable' was
displayed (e.g. apple or carrot). This study showed a significant effect (p = 0.002) for the
Wholist-Analytic dimension along the midline (locations Fz, Cz and Pz) with alpha
suppression being greater for the Analytics and fairly uniform along the line, while for
the Wholists suppression decreased from anterior to posterior. For the Verbal-Imagery

Downloaded by [McGill University Library] at 10:58 26 December 2012

The Nature of Cognitive Styles

Low

41

High
Style dimension

FIG. 2. Schematic graph of performance and condition.

dimension, the ratio of the power output at T5 (left) to that at T6 (right) correlated
with the Verbal-Imagery ratio r = 0.50 (p = 0.055) in the expected direction. It should
be noted that in this study the tasks were likely to favour Analytics and Verbalisers. In
view of this, the finding of significant style effects is encouraging. Further studies are
required using a range of information-processing tasks that are in the natural mode for
each style.
(6) Style Dimension Positive and Negative Interaction with a Variable
It is in the nature of a style, as distinct from an ability, that it should interact with a
variable such that the relative performance of an individual at one extreme of a
dimension should be higher than that of a person at the other end in one condition, but
that the situation should be reversed when the condition is changed. This is shown
schematically in Fig. 2.
Fig. 2 shows the idealised relationship, which, in practice, is not likely to be so linear
and the crossover may not be at the centre of the dimension. Further, in many real-life
tasks there is likely to be an interaction between the two dimensions and the condition,
rather'than an effect of only one of the dimensions without any effect of the other.
However, single dimension interactions have been observed. For the Wholist-Analytic
dimension, this type of interaction was observed in the case of Douglas and Riding
(1993) in the study of the effect of the position, before or after, of a prose passage title
on recall. In the case of the Verbal-Imagery dimension, the interaction was found in the
studies by Riding and Douglas (1993) on text-plus-text versus text-plus-picture presentation of learning material, and by Riding and Watts (this issue) in the observed
preference for verbal or pictorial formats of instructional material.

Towards a Model of Style
Style and Strategies
It is useful to distinguish between style and strategy. Style probably has a physiological
basis and is fairly fixed for the individual. By contrast, strategies are ways that may be
learned and developed to cope with situations and tasks, and particularly methods of

42

R. J. Riding

utilising styles to make the best of situations for which they are not ideally suited.
Within the literature, the term 'learning style' is sometimes used to refer to what here
is considered to be a strategy. A useful distinction has been made by Curry (1983).

Downloaded by [McGill University Library] at 10:58 26 December 2012

Curry's Onion Model
Curry (1983) proposed that all cognitive/learning style measures may be grouped into
three main types or "strata resembling layers of an onion". By organising learning style
measures like this, "learning behaviour is fundamentally controlled by the central
personality dimension, translated through middle strata information processing dimensions and, given a final twist by interaction with environmental factors encountered in
the outer strata".
According to Curry, the outermost layer of the onion and the most observable style
is what she labels as "instructional preference". Examples of measures of this style are
the Learning Preference Inventory (Rezler & Rezmovic, 1981) and the Grasha Reichmann Students Learning Styles Scales (Reichmann & Grasha, 1974). Instructional
preference refers to the individual's choice of environment in which to learn. As this is
the layer that is most exposed to the learner's environment, learner expectations,
teacher expectations and other external features, Curry believes instructional preference
to be the least stable, the most easily influenced level of measurement in the learning
styles area.
The second layer of the onion model is referred to as the 'information processing
style'. This is considered as the individual's intellectual approach to assimilating
information, and, because this processing does not directly involve the environment,
Curry believes that measures of this style are more stable than instructional preference,
but are still modifiable by learning strategies. Measures such as the Learning Style
Inventory (Kolb, 1976) and Inventory of Learning Processes (Schmeck et al., 1977) are
all thought to be dealing with information processing style concepts applicable at the
intersection between fundamental personality level individual differences and environmentally offered learning format choices.
The third and the innermost layer of the hypothetical learning style onion is
'cognitive personality style'. The cognitive personality style is denned as the individual's
approach to adapting and assimilating information, which does not interact directly
with the environment, but is an underlying and relatively permanent personality
dimension that is expressed indirectly and is apparent only when an individual's
behaviour is observed across many learning instances. Examples of measures which
Curry suggested assess this third type of learning style are the Embedded Figures Test
(Witkin, 1962); Myers-Briggs Type Indicator (Myers, 1962); and Matching Familiar
Figures Test (Kagan, 1965).
On the basis of the onion model, the Cognitive Styles Analysis would be placed in the
innermost level.
The Cognitive Control Model
A possible model, which is an elaboration of that of Curry, of Riding and Rayner
(1995) and Riding and Wigley (submitted), and which also bears some similarities to
that of Furnham (1995, p. 398), will be sketched in outline and this is shown
schematically in Fig. 3.
At the inmost level, there are a number of underlying primary sources comprising the

Downloaded by [McGill University Library] at 10:58 26 December 2012

The Nature of Cognitive Styles

43

FIG. 3.

memory of the individual's past experiences and knowledge, their underlying personality sources and their gender. In order to make the model more concrete, some of the
personality sources have been given tentative names, although clear physiological
mechanisms for them have yet to be fully identified.
The next level is that of cognitive control. This comprises the two dimensions of
style, the Wholist-Analytic and the Verbal-Imagery. It provides the organisational and
representational interface between the internal state and the external world. It combines the internal state with the information from the external world and imposes on
the response and view its own structure and form. The ways in which the WholistAnalytic dimension and the Verbal-Imagery dimension may affect attitude and behaviour have been discussed by Riding (1991b) and Riding (1994).
At the input level will the perceptual and working memory processing system which
analyses the incoming information. The performance of this may be considered to be
the main determiner of 'intelligence' as assessed by intelligence tests, as many test items
seem to concentrate on this area.
At the output level, there will be the learning strategies. These will have developed
by, for instance, the individual then sensing that certain modes are easier to use, and
then recognising a learning preference, and then deciding to 'translate' new incoming
information into that representation. At this level, there will also be the cognitive
response 'set' that influences social behaviour. (It may be observed that learning
strategies are at a different level in this model from that of Curry.)
The perception of experiences will probably be moderated by the cognitive control

44

R. J. Riding

Downloaded by [McGill University Library] at 10:58 26 December 2012

level in interaction with the cognitive history and the primary personality sources.
Taking anxiety as an example, and building on Spielberger (1966) and Eysenck (1991),
external stimuli are assessed by the cognitive control level as to whether or not they are
threatening. Those that are interpreted as being threatening trigger the anxiety source
and the level of state anxiety increases and this, in turn, is reflected in behaviour. The
interpretation of the threat will be affected by cognitive style and also the characteristics
of the trait anxiety source.
Some tentative evidence for the model comes from the observations of interactions
between intelligence, style and gender in affecting academic achievement (Riding &
Agrell (submitted)) and between style and personality sources in affecting social
behaviour (Riding & Wigley (submitted)).

Conclusion
In order to pursue research, and particularly to develop a model and evaluate a
construct, the researcher needs to have sufficient evidence to sustain belief that the
construct may exist in order to maintain the energy to undertake the research. On the
other hand, it is also necessary to have a decree of scepticism in order to retain the
openness required to evaluate the findings. The psychological study of any construct
poses difficulties. Even a generally accepted notion, such as intelligence, has been
questioned as to whether it really exists as a valid construct (see, for instance, Howe
1990). Howe warns, "It is particularly important not to fall into the trap of believing
that by describing someone's performance we are also providing the reasons for it"
(1990, p. 493).
The validity of the construct of cognitive style, as assessed by the Cognitive Styles
Analysis approach, is supported by evidence that the dimensions are independent of
one another, separate from intelligence, independent of, but interacting with, personality; and related to observed behaviours, such as learning performance, learning preferences, subject preferences and social behaviour. There is also an indication of a
relationship between style and physiological measures. In addition, cognitive style fulfils
the requirement for the distinction between style and ability. Further, the observed
relationships between the dimensions and behaviour are consistent with the view that
the Wholist-Analytic dimension is concerned with organisation and the Verbal-Imagery
dimension with representation.
Further Research

While there is evidence to support the notion of style, a number of questions remain
and further research is need to clarify these. Possible research areas include the
following.
(a) What Are the Origins of Style? An obvious question concerns the origins of style.
They are either inbuilt or develop with experience. It could be that an individual is born
with a predisposition to use one mode of representation in preference to another. Are
there style genes? On the other hand, there is the possibility that a style emerges from
a difference between two complementary abilities. In order to illustrate this, one can
deliberately oversimplifies how the brain works and consider that within it there is one
processor for verbal information and another for pictorial. If, in an individual, these two
processors have unequal speed and processing capacity, then the individual will tend to

The Nature of Cognitive Styles

45

Downloaded by [McGill University Library] at 10:58 26 December 2012

use the one in preference to the other whenever possible, and this will lead to the
establishment of a style, or habitual preference for one over the other. Whatever the
mechanism, style appears to be present at a relatively early age. Riding and Taylor
(1976) found evidence that the Verbal-Imagery style was strongly apparent in 7-yearolds. Methods of assessing style in young children and infants need to be developed.
(b) Are There Other Fundamental Style Dimensions? Do the Wholist-Analytic and the
Verbal-Imagery dimensions encompass all style descriptors or are there are possibly
other dimensions? If there are, then they must fulfil the condition that for a style to exist
as a dimension, the two processors must represent opposites in some sense. In the case
of the Verbal-Imagery dimension, while words are not the opposite of pictures, they can
be alternative ways of representing the same information. For the Wholist-Analytic style
dimension, it is possible to see a progression from the whole to the parts. The whole is,
in this sense, the opposite of the parts; the wood comprises the individual trees. Studies
are required to compare other existing measures of style and strategy, provided they
have also been shown to possess a reasonable degree of construct validity, with the
Wholist-Analytic and Verbal-Imagery dimensions.
(c) What Is the Relationship Between Physiological Measures and Style? The identification
of the underlying physiological mechanisms associated with style is important. Further
studies using more sophisticated brain-scanning techniques to compare neural activity
during a range of tasks would be useful.
(d) Are There Cultural Differences in Style? Most of the studies using the Cognitive Styles
Analysis approach have been in the UK. The possible effect of culture on style is of
interest. If similar style patterns were to be demonstrated in a wide range of cultures,
then this would contribute to the understanding of the nature of style. In English there
are versions of the CSA for use in the UK, Northern America and Australia. In
addition, French, Dutch, Malay and Arabic versions have been developed.
(e) What Is the Interaction Between Other Sources and Style? In considering the impact of
styles on behaviour, such as learning performance, it is necessary to bear in mind the
range of individual variables that might affect learning. For a particular task, these will
include the individual's:
(a) level of ability/intelligence;
(b) present relevant knowledge which is necessary to give meaning to the new
information, or, on the other hand, that could make the new learning redundant;
(c) degree of motivation, including the perceived relevance of the task;
(d) gender; and
(e) style.
Clearly style will only be one of many influences. It will not show an effect if there is
a lot of noise in the system, occurring because other relevant variables are not measured
and included in the analysis. Further, style is not likely to be critical when the task is
simple. It is likely to be important, however, where the learner is under pressure
because, relative to their ability etc., the task is difficult. The investigation of the
conditions in which style is most critical are required. Other research could usefully
undertake the further study of personality descriptors and style.
With intelligence measures it may be noted that these are likely to include more than

46

R. J. Riding

just processing capacity and facility, as the items commonly used in intelligence tests
also assess learned knowledge and the application of acquired skills. They therefore
include within the measure the ability to learn and perform, and, hence, explain more
of the variance than style, but they are not pure measures.

Downloaded by [McGill University Library] at 10:58 26 December 2012

(f) What Is the Interaction Between Other Experiences and Style? The effect of previous
experiences on style reactions is of interest. For example, does stress make Analytics
more analytic and cautious and Wholists more impulsive?
(g) What Are the Mechanisms for Strategy Development? Given that a particular style finds
certain tasks more difficult, how can the development of effective strategies be fostered
in an individual? Various approach could be tried, for example, (i) pairing people of
dissimilar style so that they learn from one another's approaches as they work together,
(ii) deliberately present materials in mis-matched mode to encourage the production of
methods of recoding, (iii) make people aware of the potential of the complementary
nature of style dimensions where they exist in the case of Analytic-Imagers who could
use their imaging facility to give an overall, 'whole' view which they lack as Analytics.
Further, the progression of strategy development could be studied by investigating
the progression from awareness of ease of difficulty in doing a task, through preferences, awareness of limitations, to the development and refinement of strategies to cope
with stylistically inappropriate modes or situations.
(h) What is the Range of Practical Applications of Style? Riding (1994) speculated on the
practical work-place applications of style for personal development, team roles, management style and interpersonal relationships. Systematic investigation of the types of
application would clarify the practical use of style in a range of work situations.
Correspondence: R. J. Riding, Assessment Research Unit, School of Education, University of Birmingham, Birmingham, B15 2TT, UK. Email: R.J.Riding@bham.ac.uk.
NOTES
[1] The Cognitive Styles Analysis is available in various languages: English versions for the UK, North
American and Australasian contexts; French, Dutch, Arabic and Malay. Other language versions
are in preparation.
[2] In this review of work using the Cognitive Styles Analysis, the style dimension groupings (e.g.
Wholist) were usually relative to the sample used and not absolute according to a fixed ratio range.
Further, only two divisions were used where the sample was relatively small (e.g. Wholist and
Analytic) and three where it was larger (e.g. Wholist, Intermediate and Analytic).

REFERENCES
ALLINSON, C.W. & HAYES, J. (1996) The Cognitive Style Index: a measure of intuition-analysis for
organisational research, Journal of Management Studies, 33, pp. 119-135.
BARTLETT, F.C. (1932) Remembering (Cambridge, Cambridge University Press).
BORG, M.G. & RIDING, R.J. (1993) Teacher stress and cognitive style, British Journal of Educational
Psychology, 63, pp. 271-286.
BRUMBY, M.N. (1982) Consistent differences in cognitive styles shown for qualitative biological
problem-solving, British Journal of Educational Psychology, 52, pp. 244-257.
CATTELL, R.B. & WARBURTON, F.W. (1967) Objective Personality and Motivational Tests (Urbana, IL,
University of Illinois Press).

Downloaded by [McGill University Library] at 10:58 26 December 2012

The Nature of Cognitive Styles

47

COAN, R. (1974) The Optimal Personality: an empirical and theoretical analysis (New York, Columbia
University Press).
CURRY, L. (1983) An organization of learning styles theory and constructs, ERIC Document 235 185.
DELANEY, H.D. (1978) Interaction of individual differences with visual and verbal elaboration instructions, Journal of Educational Psychology, 70, pp. 306-318.
DOUGLAS, G. & RIDING, R.J. (1993) The effect of pupil cognitive style and position of prose passage
title on recall, Educational Psychology, 13, pp. 385-393.
DOUGLAS, G. & RIDING, R.J. (1994) Cognitive style and gender differences in drawing from memory
versus copying in 11-year-old children, Educational Psychology, 14, pp. 493-496.
EYSENCK, M.W. (1991) Trait anxiety and cognition, in: C.D. SPIELBERGER & I.G. SARASON (Eds) Stress
and Emotion: Vol. 14, pp. 77-84 (Washington, Hemisphere Publishing Corporation).
EYSENCK, H.J. & EYSENCK, S.B.G. (1991) Eysenck Personality Scales (London, Hodder and Stoughton).
FLEXER, B.K. & ROBERGE, J.J. (1980) IQ, field-dependence-independence, and the development of
formal operational thought, Journal of General Psychology, 103, pp. 191-201.
FOWLER, W. (1980) Cognitive differentiation and developmental learning, in H. REES & L. LIPSITT
(Ed.) Advances in Child Development and Behaviour, Vol. 15, pp. 163-206 (New York, Academic
Press).
FURNHAM, A. (1995) The relationship of personality and intelligence to cognitive style and achievement, in D.H. SAKLOFSKE & M. ZEIDNER (Eds) International Handbook of Personality and Intelligence,
pp. 397-413. (New York, Plenum Press).
GALTON F. (1883) Inquiries into Human Faculty and its Development (London, Macmillan).
GOLDSTEIN, K.M. & BLACKMAN, S. (1978) Cognitive Style: five approaches and relevant research (New
York, Wiley).
HOWE, M.J.A. (1990) Does intelligence exist?, The Psychologist, 11, pp. 490-493.
HUCKABEE, M.W. (1974) Introversion-extraversion and imagery, Psychological Reports, 34, pp. 4 5 3 454.
JAMES, W. (1890) The Principles of Psychology, Vol. 2, Ch. 18 (London, Macmillan).
KAGAN, J. (1965) Impulsive and reflective children: significance of conceptual tempo, in: J.D.
KRUMBOLTZ (Ed.) Learning and the Educational Process (Chicago, Rand McNally).
KOLB, D.A. (1976) The Learning Style Inventory: technical manual (Boston, MA, McBer & Company).
KORCHIN, S.J. (1986) Field dependence, personality theory, and clinical research, in: M. BERTINI, L.
PIZZAMIGLIO & S. WAPNER (Eds) Field Dependence in Psychological Theory, Research, and Application
(Hillsdale, NJ, Lawrence Erlbaum Associates).
MILLER, A. (1987) Cognitive styles: an integrated model, Educational Psychology, 7, pp. 251-268.
MYERS, I.B. (1962) The Myers-Briggs Type Indicator Manual (Princeton, Educational Testing Service).
PAIVIO, A. (1971) Imagery and Verbal Processes (New York, Holt, Rinehart and Winston).
RAYNER, S. & RIDING, R.J. (1996) Cognitive style and school refusal, Educational Psychology, 16(4) pp.
445-452.
RAYNER, S. & RIDING, R.J. (this issue) Towards a categorisation of cognitive styles and learning styles,
Educational Psychology, 17.
REICHMANN, S.W. & GRASHA, A.F. (1974) A rational approach to developing and assessing the
construct validity of a study learning style scales investment, Journal of Psychology, 87, pp. 213-223.
REZLER, A.G. & REZMOVIC, V. (1981) The Learning Preference Inventory, Journal of Applied Health,
10, pp. 28-34.
RICHARDSON, A. (1994) Individual Differences in Imaging: their measurement, origins and consequences
(New York, Baywood Publishing Co.).
RIDING, R.J. (1991a) Cognitive Styles Analysis (Birmingham, Learning and Training Technology).
RIDING, R.J. (1991b) Cognitive Styles Analysis User Manual (Birmingham, Learning and Training
Technology).
RIDING, R.J. (1994) Personal Style Awareness and Personal Development (Birmingham, Learning and
Training Technology).
RIDING, R.J. & ADAMS, D. (submitted) Cognitive Style and Inference Speed Following Direct and Indirect
Antecedents.
RIDING, R.J. & AGRELL, C. (in prep.) The Effect of Cognitive Style and Cognitive Skills on School
Subject Performance.
RIDING, R.J. & A L SANABANI, S. (in prep.) The Effect of Cognitive Style and the Structure of Instructional
Prose Material on Recall.
RIDING, R.J. & ANSTEY, L. (1982) Verbal-Imagery learning style and reading attainment in eight-yearold children, Journal of Research in Reading, 5, pp. 57—66.

48

R. J. Riding

RIDING, RJ. & ASHMORE, J. (1980) Verbaliser-Imager learning style and children's recall of information
presented in pictorial versus written form, Educational Studies, 6, pp. 141-145.
RIDING, R.J. & BUCKLE, C.F. (1990) Learning Styles and Training Performance (Sheffield, Training
Agency).
RIDING, R.J., BUCKLE, C.F., THOMPSON, S. & HAGGER, E. (1989) The computer determination of

learning styles as an aid to individualised computer-based training, Educational and Training Technology International, 26, pp. 393-398.

Downloaded by [McGill University Library] at 10:58 26 December 2012

RIDING, R., BURTON, D., REES, G. & SHARRATT, M. (1995) Cognitive style and personality in

12-year-old children, British Journal of Educational Psychology, 65, pp. 113-124.
RIDING, R.J. & CAINE, T. (1993) Cognitive style and GCSE performance in mathematics, English
language and French, Educational Psychology, 13, pp. 59-67.
RIDING, RJ. & CALVEY, I. (1981) The assessment of Verbal-Imagery learning styles and their effect on
the recall of concrete and abstract prose passages by eleven-year-old children, British Journal of
Psychology, 72, pp. 59-64.
RIDING, R.J. & CHEEMA, I. (1991) Cognitive styles—an overview and integration, Educational Psychology, 11, pp. 193-215.
RIDING, R.J. & CRAIG, O. (submitted) Cognitive Style and Problem Behaviour in Boys Referred to
Residential Special Schools.
RIDING, R.J. & DYER, V.A. (1980) The relationship between extraversion and Verbal-Imagery learning
styles in 12-year-old children, Personality and Individual Differences, 1, pp. 273-279.
RIDING, R.J. & DOUGLAS, G. (1993) The effect of cognitive style and mode of presentation on learning
performance, British Journal of Educational Psychology, 63, pp. 297-307.
RIDING, R.J., GLASS, A., BUTLER, S.R. & PLEYDELL-PEARCE, C.W. (submitted) Cognitive Style and

Individual in Differences in EEG Alpha During Information Processing, Educational Psychology, 17,
pp. 219-234.
RIDING, R.J., GLASS, A. & DOUGLAS, G. (1993) Individual differences in thinking: cognitive and
neurophysiological perspectives, Educational Psychology, 13, pp. 267-279.
RIDING, R.J. & MATHIAS, D. (1991) Cognitive styles and preferred learning mode, reading attainment
and cognitive ability in 11-year-old children, Educational Psychology, 11, pp. 383-393.
RIDING, RJ. & PEARSON, F. (1994) The relationship between cognitive style and intelligence, Educational Psychology, 14, pp. 413-425.
RIDING, R.J. & RAYNER, S. (1995) The information superhighway and individualised learning, Educational Psychology, 15, pp. 365-378.
RIDING, R.J. & READ, G. (1996) Cognitive style and pupil learning preferences, Educational Psychology,
16, pp. 81-106.
RIDING, RJ. & SADLER-SMITH, E. (1992) Type of instructional material, cognitive style and learning
performance, Educational Studies, 18, pp. 323-340.
RIDING, RJ. & STALEY, A. (submitted) Self-perception as Learner, Cognitive Style and Business Studies
Students' Course Performance.
RIDING, R.J. & TAYLOR, E.M. (1976) Imagery performance and prose comprehension in seven-year-old
children, Educational Studies, 2, pp. 21-27.
RIDING, R.J. & WATTS, M. (this issue) The effect of cognitive style on the preferred format of
instructional material, Educational Psychology, 17.
RIDING, R.J. & WHEELER, H. (1995) Occupational stress and cognitive style in nurses: 2, British Journal
of Nursing, 4, pp. 160-168.
RIDING, R.J. & WICKS, B.J. (1978) The effect of extraversion and presentation order in learning from
picture-commentary sequences in children, Educational Review, 5, pp. 15—22.
RIDING, R.J. & WIGLEY, S. (submitted) The Relationship Between Cognitive Style and Personality in Further
Education Students.
RIDING, RJ. & WRIGHT, M. (1995) Cognitive style, personal characteristics and harmony in student
flats, Educational Psychology, 15, pp. 337-349.
SADLER-SMITH, E. & RIDING, R.J. (submitted) Cognitive Style and Learning Preferences in Business Studies
Students.
SCHMECK, R.R., RIBICH, F.D. & RAMANIAH, N. (1977) Development of a self-report inventory for

assessing individual differences in learning processes, Applied Psychological Measurement, 1, pp.
413-431.
SCHWARTZ, S. (1975) Individual differences in cognition; some relationships between personality and
memory, Journal of Research in Personality, 9, pp. 217-225.
SPIELBERGER, C.D. (1966) Theory and research in anxiety, in: C.D. SPIELBERGER (Ed.) Anxiety and
Behavior, pp. 97-105. (New York, Academic Press).

The Nature of Cognitive Styles

49

Downloaded by [McGill University Library] at 10:58 26 December 2012

SPIELBERGER, C.D. (1977) State and Trait Anxiety Inventory Form Y 1 (Palo Alto, Consulting Psychologists' Press).
TENNANT, M. (1988) Psychology and Adult Learning (London, Routledge).
Witkin, H.A. (1962) Psychological Differentiation; studies of development (New York, Wiley).
WITKIN, H.A., GOODENOUGH, D.R. & OLTMAN, P.K. (1979) Psychological differentiation: current
status, Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 37, pp. 1127-1145.
WITKIN, H.A., OLTMAN, P.K., RASKIN, E. & KARP, S.A. (1971) Manual for the Embedded Figures Tests
(Palo Alto, CA, Consulting Psychologists' Press).

