Journal of Personality and Social Psychology
1992, Vol. 62, No. 6,1036-1049

Copyright 1992 by the American Psychological Association, Inc
OO22-3514/92/S3.OO

Compartmentalization of Positive and Negative Self-Knowledge:
Keeping Bad Apples Out of the Bunch
Carolin Showers

This document is copyrighted by the American Psychological Association or one of its allied publishers.
This article is intended solely for the personal use of the individual user and is not to be disseminated broadly.

University of Wisconsin—Madison
Three studies examined whether categorical organization of knowledge about the self explains
variance in self-esteem and depression beyond that which is accounted for by sheer amount of
positive or negative content. Compartmentalization is the tendency to organize positive and negative knowledge about the self into separate, uniformly valenced categories (self-aspects). As long as
positive self-aspects are activated, access to negative information should be minimized. Compartmentalization was associated with high self-esteem and low depression scores for individuals
whose positive self-aspects were important; when negative self-aspects were important, compartmentalization was correlated with low self-esteem and high depression scores. An analysis of
self-aspect labels showed that individuals with compartmentalized organization define negative
self-aspects in especially narrow terms. A possible relationship between compartmentalized organization and cognitive complexity is discussed.

Increasingly, models of the self take a multidimensional, multifaceted view of the self-concept (e.g., Epstein, 1973; Greenwald & Pratkanis, 1984; Markus& Wurf, 1987). Empirical work
has shown that people have multiple self-aspects or identities
denned by situations (Pelham & Swann, 1989), roles (Stryker,
1980), other persons (James, 1890; S. Rosenberg, 1988), audiences (Schlenker & Weigold, 1989), goals (Carver & Scheier,
1990; Markus & Nurius, 1986), traits and mood states (Pietromonaco, 1985), or combinations of these (Linville, 1985,1987).
Whatever may be the dimensions along which multiple aspects
of the self are denned, self theorists recognize that the multifaceted nature of the self allows us to differentiate among various
self-aspects; that is, we may construct different selves to fit
different contexts (Cantor, Markus, Niedenthal, & Nurius,
1986; Kihlstrom & Cantor, 1984). Moreover, we may have some
aspects of the self that are well-elaborated and some that are
not, some aspects that are evaluated positively and some that
are not, and some aspects that are important and some that are
not.
Studies of global self-esteem demonstrate how the multidimensional organization of self-knowledge allows individuals to
maintain a differentiated view of themselves across different
domains (Hoge & McCarthy, 1984; Marsh, 1986). Global selfPortions of this research were supported by faculty grants from Barnard College and by a fellowship from the National Institute of Mental
Health (MH1OO58). Study 3 was conducted by Anne Protsman and
submitted as a senior thesis at the University of Wisconsin.
I thank Lyn Abramson, Ben Dykman, Suzanne Carter, Jean Chapman, Jack Mayer, Paula Niedenthal, and three anonymous reviewers
for their helpful comments and suggestions. I am also grateful to Allison Missling, Lynette Studer, Elisha Tarlow, and Deborah Weiss for
their assistance in collecting and coding these data.
Correspondence concerning this article should be addressed to Carolin Showers, Department of Psychology, University of Wisconsin,
1202 West Johnson Street, Madison, Wisconsin 53706. Electronic
mail may be sent to showers@wiscmacc.bitnet.
1036

esteem can be predicted by assessing an individual's self-evaluations in a set of specific domains and then averaging across
them. Most recently, Pelham and Swann (1989) confirmed the
hypothesis that the predictive power of domain-specific evaluations improves if the perceived importance of each domain is
taken into account. Similarly, Harter (1988) reported that children with high global self-worth are successful in domains they
perceive to be important and are able to discount the importance of domains in which they feel less adequate. Thus, the
association between positive or negative evaluations of the self
and global self-esteem may be minimal if those evaluations
appear in domains that are perceived to be low in importance.
This multidimensional view suggests that it is not just the positive or negative content of one's knowledge about the self that
matters, but how that information is organized in relation to
other aspects of the self.
The self-esteem studies cited earlier impose a priori, situationally defined domains on the individual in assessing selfevaluations. However, from an information processing view,
multiple aspects of the self are idiographically defined categories that people use to organize self-knowledge. The nature of
these categories may influence processing of old and of new
information about the self (Klein & Kihlstrom, 1986). According to category models of memory, categorical organization influences the accessibility of relevant information (Hastie, 1980;
Srull, 1983). When a particular category of information is activated, the accessibility of all items of information associated
with that category is enhanced (Bower, 1970; Tulving & Pearlstone, 1966). Thus, we may be able to use categorical organization to control the accessibility of positive and negative knowledge about the self. The types of categories (i.e., self-aspects)
that we construct may determine whether we have self-aspects
that are extremely positive or negative and whether those
aspects are perceived to be important or not.
For example, consider two college students, both of whom
have exactly the same knowledge about themselves as students.

This document is copyrighted by the American Psychological Association or one of its allied publishers.
This article is intended solely for the personal use of the individual user and is not to be disseminated broadly.

COMPARTMENTALIZATION OF THE SELF

Imagine that one student organizes this knowledge under two
self-aspects, one that contains mostly positive information
("myself as a brilliant Renaissance scholar") and one that contains mostly negative information ("worrying about tests and
grades"). This student has compartmentalized positive and negative information about the self as student into separate categories. As long as his academic experiences typically activate only
the first category, the most accessible information about the
self as student will be positive. Negative information about self
as student only comes to mind when the second category is
activated. To the extent that he can avoid activating the negative
category (e.g., by avoiding courses with high-pressure exams or
by taking courses on a pass-fail basis), he will activate only
positive knowledge about self as student.
In contrast, Table 1 shows how that same knowledge about
the self might be organized along different lines, unrelated to
the positive or negative valence of the information. Hypothetically, a second individual might have the same items of knowledge about the self as thefirststudent, but she might organize
them into two different self-aspects, each containing a mix of
positive and negative information ("myself in humanities
classes" and "myself in science classes"). This mixed organization would mean that both positive and negative information
about the self would be activated when either category was
primed. As long as thefirststudent primarily activates the "Renaissance scholar" category, it would seem that compartmentalized organization would be preferable to the mixed organization of the second student, who activates some negative information regardless of which category is primed.
In a similar way, the psychological phenomenon of "splitting" the self into distinctly positive and negative aspects (the
good me vs. the bad me) is said to be an important defensive
mechanism for coping with negative experience and negative
knowledge about the self (Bowlby, 1980; Sullivan, 1953). From a
psychodynamic point of view, the splitting of the good me and
the bad me facilitates the repression of negative experience.
From an information processing perspective, compartmentalized categorization of positive and negative information may
help to limit the accessibility of negative knowledge. Moreover,
each category or self-aspect may be evaluated as more or less
important; namely, more or less central to the self as a whole.
When a negative category is perceived to be low in importance,
the individual may be able to avoid the situations or experiences
that would activate that category. Thus, if the first student sees
grades and tests as unimportant, then he may choose courses
with less structured forms of evaluation. When he does have to
take a test, a great deal of negative knowledge about the self may
be activated, but it may also be seen as unimportant and not
central to the self.1
However, when one's negative categories are frequently accessed or are especially important to the self, then it would
seem that compartmentalization would increase the impact of
negative events on the self. A negative event would likely activate a negative category andfloodthe individual with negative
information. This would intensify an individual's negative reactions in the short term, and with repeated activation, it would
presumably have long-term implications for global self-evaluations and affect. Thus, the relationship between compartmentalized organization and global thoughts and feelings about the

1037

self may depend on the relative importance and frequency of
activation of positive and negative categories. When positive
categories are most important or most frequently accessed,
then the model predicts that compartmentalization will be associated with more positive self-evaluation and positive affect
than noncompartmentalized organization; however, when negative categories are most frequently activated, compartmentalization should maximize negative thoughts and feelings about
the self.
Existing Literature on the Organization
of Self-Knowledge
The present work highlights a distinction between the content and the organization of self-knowledge that has been made
in literature on self-schemata (Segal, 1988) and construct accessibility (Higgins & Bargh, 1987; Higgins, King, & Mavin, 1982).
In particular, although negative self-descriptions and negative
constructs appear to be available and highly accessible among
depressed persons (Bargh & Tota, 1988), there is very little evidence as to how the organization of negative information (in
relation to other less negative information about the self) might
facilitate accessibility. Recent studies that have examined the
interconnectedness of positive and negative information have
obtained mixed results, and they did not explicitly examine the
categorical structure of the information (Higgins, Van Hook, &
Dorfman, 1988; Segal, Hood, Shaw, & Higgins, 1988; Showers,
in press; Spielman & Bargh, 1990).
Linville's (1985,1987) work on self-complexity examines the
organization of self-descriptive information into idiographically generated categories (i.e., self-aspects; see also Niedenthal,
Setterlund, & Wherry, in press). The self-complexity model focuses on the number of differentiated self-aspects irrespective
of their positive or negative content. However, evaluative valence may be an especially salient basis for the organization of
information about self and others (Greenwald & Pratkanis,
1984; Kim & Rosenberg, 1980; Rogers, 1981; Ross, 1989). Studies of possible selves consider both the adaptive and maladaptive potential of positive and negative self-aspects (Ruvolo &
Markus, 1986; Wurf & Markus, 1990). While Oyserman and
Markus (1990) found that the number of negative possible selves
was correlated with negative outcomes (cf. also Ogilvie, 1987, on
the undesired self), they also discovered that the balance of
positive expected selves and negative feared selves was predictive of nondelinquent behavior in adolescents. This is consistent with the present prediction that compartmentalization of
positive and negative self-aspects is associated with a positive
view of the self as long as negative aspects are "balanced" by
more important positive ones. Methodologically, these studies
share an idiographic approach to the assessment of positive and
negative self-aspects.2
1

Important self-aspects are understood to be those that have a
strong influence on one's overall feelings of self-worth. Pelham and
Swann (1989) presented an excellent discussion of this view of importance, which is in keeping with that adopted by Hoge and McCarthy
(1984) and Marsh (1986).
2
Similarly, self-discrepancy theory (e.g., Strauman & Higgins, 1987)
compares positive ideal or ought selves with actual selves that may be

1038

CAROLIN SHOWERS

Table 1
Examples ofCompartmentalized Organization and Mixed Organization
for Identical Items of Information About Self as Student

This document is copyrighted by the American Psychological Association or one of its allied publishers.
This article is intended solely for the personal use of the individual user and is not to be disseminated broadly.

Compartmentalized organization

Mixed organization

Renaissance
scholar (+)

Taking tests,
grades (-)

Humanities
classes (+/-)

Science
classes (+/-)

+ curious
+ disciplined
+ motivated
+ creative
+ analytical
+ expressive

- worrying
- tense
- distracted
- insecure
- competitive
- moody

+ creative
- insecure
+ motivated
- distracted
+ expressive
- moody

+ disciplined
+ analytical
- competitive
- worrying
+ curious
- tense

Note. A positive (+) or negative (-) valence is indicated for each category and each item. The symbol (+/-)
denotes a mixed-valence category.

Is Organization of Self-Knowledge Cause or
Consequence of Self-Evaluation and Affect?
The discussion up to this point suggests that compartmentalized organization of self-knowledge may have a causal impact on reactions to positive and negative events. If
compartmentalization is a characteristic way of organizing selfknowledge, then it may also influence global self-evaluations
and aifect. However, it is also possible that global self-evaluations or affective states influence organization (Blaney, 1986;
Mayer, Gayle, Meehan, & Haarman, 1990; Salovey & Singer,
1991). The evaluative valence of information may be more salient to individuals in extreme mood states or to those who hold
extremely positive or negative views of the self (Pietromonaco,
1985). As a result, such individuals may be more likely to organize that information according to its valence (e.g., "the depressed me"). Because the direction of causality could lead either way, in the present studies I used a correlational design to
establish whether the organization of self-knowledge is related
to global self-evaluation and current affective state.
Study 1 (Pilot)
A pilot study examined whether current levels of self-esteem
or depressed mood were associated with a measure of compartmentalization of positive and negative characteristics of the
self. According to the model outlined earlier, compartmentalized organization may be associated with either extremely high
or extremely low self-esteem and depressed mood, depending
on whether one's positive or negative categories are most important. However, in a random sample of individuals, most people
probably view their positive aspects as the important ones.
Thus, compartmentalization should most often be associated
with high self-esteem and low depression scores. However, if
the sample includes a sufficient number of individuals who
compartmentalize positives and negatives and who view their
negative categories as highly important, then those individuals
relatively negative. Although such discrepancies have been linked to
negative affect (anxiety or sadness), the balance of positive ideal or
ought selves with negative actual selves may be adaptive and motivate
change.

will likely be extremely low in self-esteem or depressed. Thus,
although a negative, linear relationship between compartmentalization and depression or low self-esteem was expected for
the present random sample, the possibility of a quadratic relationship between compartmentalization and self-esteem or depression was considered as well. In either case, these relationships are theoretically most interesting if compartmentalized
organization of self-knowledge explains variance in self-esteem
and depression beyond that which can be accounted for by the
negative content of self-descriptive information.

Method
Subjects
Subjects were 69 female and 13 male undergraduates from Barnard
College and Columbia University who volunteered to participate to
satisfy a course requirement or to earn $5.

Measures
Compartmentalization. The measure of compartmentalization was
based on the same self-concept sorting task used by Linville (1985,
1987) to assess self-complexity. Subjects were given a deck of 33 cards,
each containing an adjective derived from pretesting (see following
discussion). They were told, "\bur task is to think of the different
aspects of yourself or your life and then sort the cards into groups
where each group describes an aspect of yourself or your life." The
remainder of the instructions were very similar to those published by
Linville (1987). Subjects were told that they could form as many or as
few groups as they needed, with as many or as few cards asfitinto each
one. If an adjective did not fit into any of their groups, they could
simply set it aside. Subjects were given 25 min to complete this task.
The 33 adjectives used in the sorts were based on pretesting of 36
Barnard students, who were asked to generate lists of characteristics
that described them in academic, social, and family situations, respectively A set of 21 positive and 12 negative characteristics that appeared
most frequently on these lists were selected for the sorting task, and the
consensual evaluation of these characteristics as positive or negative
was confirmed by a separate sample of pretest subjects. This ratio of
positives to negatives (21:12) is similar to the ratio of positive to negative self-statements observed in the automatic thoughts of a normal
population (Kendall & Motion, 1981; Schwartz, 1986).
The measure of compartmentalization across multiple self-aspects
was the phi (0) coefficient (or Cramer's V; Cramer, 1945/1974; Everitt,

1039

COMPARTMENTALIZATION OF THE SELF

This document is copyrighted by the American Psychological Association or one of its allied publishers.
This article is intended solely for the personal use of the individual user and is not to be disseminated broadly.

1977), which was based on a chi-square statistic computed for each
subject's sort. The sort can be viewed as a contingency table, where
each self-aspect is a column of the table, and there are two rows, one for
the number of positive characteristics in that self-aspect and one for
the number of negative characteristics. Expected frequencies of positives and negatives in each column can be computed from the overall
ratio of positives to negatives in that individual's sort. These expected
frequencies represent chance values, if valence is not used as a basis for
categorization. The chi-square statistic is a measure of deviation from
a random sort, and

Phi ranges from 0 to 1, where 0 represents a perfectly random sort
and 1 represents a perfectly compartmentalized sort. This measure is
independent of the number of categories and the proportion of positives and negatives in the sort.
Personality measures. The measure of global self-evaluation was
the 10-item Rosenberg Self-Esteem Scale (M. Rosenberg, 1965). The
Beck Depression Inventory (BDI; Beck, Ward, Mendelson, Mock, &
Erbaugh, 1961) assessed depressed mood.

Procedure
Subjects participated in groups of 2 to 10. The self-descriptive sorting task was completed first, followed by the personality measures.
This order was chosen to avoid the possibility thatfillingout self-evaluative personality measures would activate a positive-negative dimension as a basis for categorization in the sorting task.

Results
Two subjects' data were excluded because they used 0 and 1
negative adjectives, respectively, in their sorts. For the remaining subjects, the minimum number of negatives used was 4. On
average, subjects' sorts consisted of 6.4 categories, containing
7.9 words per category. On average, the sorts included 16.0
(30%) negative adjectives and excluded 5.1 adjectives from the
card deck. Mean compartmentalization (<£) was .71 (SD = .21),
which was significantly different from zero, /(78) = 3.4, p <
.005. Table 2 displays a sort with perfect compartmentalization.
Hierarchical multiple regression analyses were used to examine the relationship of compartmentalization to depression and
self-esteem scores, after the negative content of the self-descriptive sorts had been taken into account. In each regression (pre-

dicting either self-esteem or depressed mood), the proportion
of negative items used in the subject's sort was arcsine transformed (to stabilize variance) and entered on Step 1. Phi was
entered on Step 2, resulting in a significant change in the
squared multiple correlation for both the self-esteem and the
depressed mood equations (A/?2 > .05, ps < .04; see Table 3).
The signs of the semipartials indicate that there was a negative
linear relationship between compartmentalized organization
and depression or low self-esteem.
A second pair of regressions showed no evidence of a quadratic relationship between depressed mood or self-esteem
and compartmentalization (A/?2 for quadratic terms < .03,
ps>.15).

Discussion
As predicted for a random sample, compartmentalized organization of positive and negative characteristics was associated
with high self-esteem and low depression scores. Moreover,
these subjects exhibited a substantial degree of compartmentalization in that their average score on this measure was fairly
high (71 on a scale from 0 to 1). There was no evidence for the
alternative hypothesis that compartmentalization may be associated with negative mood and self-evaluation when negative
self-aspects are important. However, because I did not ask subjects to evaluate the importance or negativity of their selfaspects, it was not possible to examine explicitly the role of
negativity and importance as specified by the theoretical
model. A preliminary test of the theoretical model (by including quadratic depressed mood and self-esteem terms in the
regression analysis) provided no support for a curvilinear relationship between compartmentalization and depression or selfesteem.
However, as suggested earlier, in a random sample of individuals, most will evaluate their positive self-aspects as most important. Therefore, to test explicitly the possibility that compartmentalization may be associated with either extremely
good or extremely poor self-evaluation and affect, the sample
should include a group of individuals who are likely to articulate important negative self-aspects. One such group of individuals may be those who frequently become depressed. The negativity of the self-statements of depressed persons is well-known

Table 2
Sample Sort of Self-Descriptive Adjectives Showing Perfect Compartmentalization
of Positives and Negatives (4> = 1.0)
Amusement-play
Energetic
Fun and entertaining
Creative

Responsibleconscientious
Independent
Communicative
Hardworking
Mature
Organized

Relaxed

Bad mood

Sports-aggressive

Quiet
Affectionate
Comfortable
Kind
Reflective
Happy
Giving
Friendly
Interested

Disagreeing
Insecure
Lazy
Tense
Irritable
Not the "real me"

Confident
Assertive
Outgoing

1040

CAROLIN SHOWERS

Table 3
Study 1 (Pilot): Hierarchical Regressions to Predict Depression and Self-Esteem
From Measures ofContent and Organization ofthe Self
Depressed mood

Self-esteem

Predictor

Cumulative
R2

Increase
in R2

sr2

sr

Cumulative
R2

Increase
in R2

sr2

sr

Step 1: Proportion of
negative items
Step 2: 0

.07*
.12*

.07*
.05*

.07*
.05*

.27*
-.23*

.10**
.15**

.10**
.05*

.10**
.05*

-.31**
.23*

This document is copyrighted by the American Psychological Association or one of its allied publishers.
This article is intended solely for the personal use of the individual user and is not to be disseminated broadly.

Note. Depressed mood was determined by score on the Beck Depression Inventory (BDI); self-esteem
was determined by score on Rosenberg Self-Esteem Scale. Phi is the measure of compartmentalization.
Proportion of negatives was arcsine transformed. BDI scores were square-root transformed. N= 80.

*p<.05.

**p<.0l.

(e.g., Beck, 1976). Individuals who are not just currently depressed but who also report a history of depressive episodes
(depression prone) are especially likely to be experiencing a lowself-esteem subtype of depression (Abramson, Metalsky, & Alloy, 1989). In other words, their negative mood is likely to be
associated with a negative view of the self, rather than simply
being a one-time response to an unusually severe negative
event.
Study 2
Study 2 replicated the correlational design of Study 1 with
two groups of subjects, one identified as not prone to depression and not currently depressed and the other identified as
prone to depression and currently depressed. By using both
current mood and chronic vulnerability to depression as criteria, one can capitalize on the possibility that mood state may be
both cause and consequence of the way information about the
self is organized.
In addition, in Study 2, subjects were asked to evaluate
whether each of their self-aspects was positive or negative and to
indicate the importance of each. It was predicted that negative
self-aspects would be more important to depressed subjects
than they would be to nondepressed subjects. Moreover, the
relationship between compartmentalized organization and
mood state should depend on the importance of subjects' negative categories. As long as negative self-aspects are perceived to
be of low importance, compartmentalized organization should
be associated with positive mood. However, for individuals
whose negative self-aspects are highly important, compartmentalized organization should be associated with higher levels of
depression, even when the amount of negative content in their
self-descriptions has been taken into account.
The availability of importance measures in this study also
allowed a conceptual replication of Pelham and Swann's (1989)
finding that global self-esteem is best predicted when subject's
reports of the positivity of their self-concept in a set of domains
are weighted by the individual's perceived importance of each
domain. In the present analysis, the average positivity of subjects' self-aspects and a measure of positivity weighted by importance were included in the initial step of the regression anal-

yses as measures of negative content (along with the proportion
of negative characteristics in each subject's sort).
Method
Subjects
A total of 1,037 introductory psychology students at the University
of Wisconsin filled out the Depression Proneness Inventory (DPI; Alloy, Hartlage, Metalsky, & Abramson, 1989) and the BDI as part of a
mass survey during the first week of their semester. The prone-depressed group consisted of individuals who scored in the uppermost
quartile (59 or more) on the DPI and 12 or more on the BDI. The not
prone-nondepressed group consisted of individuals who scored in the
lowest quartile (35 or less) on the DPI and 6 or less on the BDI. Equal
numbers of men and women were selected. Forty-nine not prone-nondepressed individuals and 41 prone-depressed individuals participated in the laboratory sessions. Students received bonus credit toward
their course grade for participation in the mass survey or the laboratory session.

Self-Concept Sorting Task
The same self-concept sorting task developed for Study 1 was used.
In addition, after completing their sorts, subjects did the following
supplementary tasks: (a) wrote a descriptive label for each of their selfaspects; (b) numbered their self-aspects in order of importance, assigning a 1 to the aspect that they considered the most important aspect of
themselves;3 (c) indicated whether each aspect was mostly positive,
mostly negative, or both positive and negative; and (d) rated the positivity and the negativity of each aspect on 5-point Likert scales.

Procedure
Subjects participated in laboratory sessions in groups of 2 to 10. The
experimenter was blind to the depression proneness status of the subjects. Subjects were given 25 min to complete the self-concept sorting
task. At the end of this period, they completed the supplementary
ratings of positivity, negativity, and importance. Finally, subjects filled
out the Rosenberg Self-Esteem Scale and the BDI. These measures
3
More specifically, subjects were asked to consider "how important
each self-aspect is for the way you think about yourself, i.e., how central is that self-aspect to your overall concept of yourself."

1041

COMPARTMENTALIZATION OF THE SELF
were administered last so that the self-evaluative content of these
scales would not influence the sorts.

This document is copyrighted by the American Psychological Association or one of its allied publishers.
This article is intended solely for the personal use of the individual user and is not to be disseminated broadly.

Results
BDI scores at the time of the laboratory session were used as a
check on the selection of subjects. Only subjects whose laboratory BDI scores were consistent with their mass survey scores
were included in the analyses. Subjects in the prone-depressed
group whose BDI scores were below 9 were excluded from the
analyses. Similarly, subjects in the not prone-nondepressed
group whose BDI scores were 9 or above were excluded. This
left 42 not prone-nondepressed subjects (24 men and 18
women) and 30 prone-depressed subjects (14 men and 16
women).
A separate sample of 485 University of Wisconsin introductory psychology students had an average Rosenberg Self-Esteem Scale score of 32.6 (on a scale from 10 to 40). Among the
42 nondepressed subjects included in our analyses, the average
score was 36.4. The average self-esteem score of the depressed
group was 26.3, with only 2 individuals obtaining scores above
33. Thus, the screening procedure successfully identified depressed individuals who also had low self-esteem.
In preparation for the regression analyses, three measures of
the negativity of the content of subjects' sorts were computed.
The first measure was the proportion of negative characteristics used in the sort. These values were arcsine transformed to
stabilize variance. The second measure was the average positivity or negativity of each subject's self-aspects. This measure was
the average across an individual's self-aspects of the difference
between the positivity and negativity ratings for each aspect.
Positive scores indicate that, on average, self-aspects are evaluated positively.
The third measure of content was differential importance
(from Pelham & Swann, 1989). This is the correlation, computed for each individual across their self-aspects, of their importance rankings and their positivity-negativity difference
scores for each aspect. The signs of the resulting correlations
were reversed, so that positive correlations indicated that the
individual tended to rank more positive self-aspects as more
important and negative correlations indicated that the individual evaluated negative self-aspects as more important.
Table 4, Panel A, presents means for the depressed and nondepressed groups on the raw measures of content and organization (as well as their average self-esteem and depression scores).
All measures of content showed significant differences. However, note that even the depressed subjects generated selfaspects that were generally positive; their average positivitynegativity difference score was positive (M = 1.09). Moreover,
their differential importance (which can range from - 1 to 1)
was positive {M = .59), indicating that even depressed subjects
ranked their positive aspects as more important than their negative aspects.
Hierarchical regression analyses were performed with selfesteem and depression scores, respectively, as the dependent
variables. Each regression had four steps:
Step 1. Enter the three measures of content to control for
variance that would be due to amount of negative content.

Step 2. Enter the interactions of differential importance with
the other two measures of negative content (proportion of negative items and average positivity of self-aspects). These interactions, as well as the main effect term for differential importance, would replicate Pelham and Swann's (1989)findingsthat
differential importance is a significant predictor of global selfesteem (main effect), primarily for individuals whose self-descriptions are relatively negative (interaction terms).
Step 3. Enter the measure of compartmentalization (phi),
testing whether organization has a linear relationship to self-esteem or depression, once the effects of positive and negative
content and differential importance have been taken into account.
Step 4. Enter the interaction of phi with the differential importance of subjects' positive and negative self-aspects to test
the full theoretical model.
The theoretical model predicts that compartmentalized organization will interact with differential importance. Compartmentalization will be associated with lower depression scores
and higher self-esteem scores among individuals whose positive
aspects are perceived to be relatively important. However, when
negative self-aspects are perceived to be important, compartmentalization will be associated with increased depression and
lower self-esteem.
Table 5 reports the results of the regressions for the prediction of self-esteem and depression, respectively. The measures
of negative content accounted for 17% and 22% of the variance
in self-esteem and depression scores, respectively. In particular,
this was due to the proportion of negatives used, rather than to
the average positivity or negativity of the self-aspects or to differential importance. The interaction terms involving differential importance were also nonsignificant, thereby failing to replicate Pelham and Swann's (1989)findings.Contrary to the theoretical model, but consistent with the findings of Study 1,
there was a significant positive, linear relationship between
compartmentalized organization and high self-esteem (and low
depression scores). There was no evidence of any interaction of
phi with differential importance.4

Discussion
Even though Study 2 included a group of subjects selected for
proneness to depression and currently depressed mood, the
findings replicate the positive, linear relationship between
compartmentalized organization and high self-esteem (and low
depression) observed in Study 1. The prone-depressed group of
subjects did use more negative characteristics in their self-descriptive sorts than did the not prone-nondepressed group. Depressed subjects also rated their self-aspects less positively than
did nondepressed subjects and had weaker correlations between their importance rankings and the positivity of their selfaspects. However, including the importance ratings and their

4

Regressions performed for men and women separately obtained
very similar results. For the depression equation, the change in R2 for
phi (Step 3) was .20 (p < .005) for men and. 15 (p < .02) for women.

1042

CAROLIN SHOWERS

Table 4
Measures of Depressed Mood, Self-Esteem, Negative Content, and Compartmentalization
for Nondepressed and Depressed Groups in Study 2 (Panel A) and Study 3 (Panel B)
Panel A: Study 2
Nondepressed Depressed
(n = 42)
(« = 30)

Measure

This document is copyrighted by the American Psychological Association or one of its allied publishers.
This article is intended solely for the personal use of the individual user and is not to be disseminated broadly.

Beck Depression Inventory
Rosenberg Self-Esteem Scale
Proportion of negative items
Average positivity of groups
Differential importance
Compartmentalization <£

17.7
26.3

2.9

36.4
.22

.33

2.05

1.09

.64
.70

.59
.66

Panel B: Study 3
t

-12.17*
-11.87*
-4.39*
3.81*
0.81
1.02

Nondepressed Depressed
(71 = 41)
(n = 36)
16.3
25.1

2.1

36.2
.21

.44

2.39

0.41

.59
.68

.29
.76

;

-12.76*
-12.81*
-8.32*
6.80*
3.31*
-1.65

Note. Scores for average positivity of groups in Study 3 have been adjusted to make the scale comparable
with that used in Study 2.
*p<.001.

interaction with the measure of organization in the analysis did
not have the theoretically predicted effects.
At this point, two interpretations of the findings seemed
plausible. First, accepting these results at face value suggests
that compartmentalization may indeed always be associated
with more positive views of the self and positive affect than
distributed organization. For example, there may be advantages
to organizing information about the self so that one always has a
few self-aspects that are purely positive, regardless of how important one's negative aspects are. A homeless child who has
many negative self-aspects (e.g., "living in the shelter," "trouble
with kids at school," and "missing my Dad") may be better off if
she can isolate one self-aspect that is purely positive (e.g., "taking music lessons at the Settlement") than ifshe were to incorporate the positive information with other features of her daily life

in a set of self-aspects, each of which included a mix of positive
and negative characteristics.
Alternatively, it is possible that the theoretical model that
predicts a curvilinear relationship between compartmentalization and the positivity of one's view of the self in fact holds, but
that the present method has failed to identify individuals with
important negative self-aspects. Although the depressed subjects in this study generated more negative self-aspects than did
the nondepressed subjects, their self-descriptions were still
largely positive. Recall that the depressed subjects' average rating of their self-aspects was positive, as was their average differential importance (Table 4, Panel A). Only 6% of the sample
obtained differential importance scores that were less than
zero, meaning that their more negative self-aspects were rated
as more important than their positive ones. Yet it is only under

Table 5
Study 2: Hierarchical Regressions to Predict Depression and Self-Esteem
From Measures ofContent and Organization ofthe Self
Depressed mood
Predictor
Step 1:
Proportion of negative
items (NI)
Average positivity of
groups (PG)
Differential
importance (DI)
Step 2:
NIXDI
PGXDI
S t e p 3 : <)>
Step 4: <j> X DI

Cumulative : Increase
R2
in/? 2
.22***

sr2

sr

.22***

Cumulative Increase
R2
inR2
.17**

.08* -.29*

.00

-.00

.00

.05

.01

-.07

.01

.11

.00

.02
.10

.02

.13***
.00

sr

.17**

.18*
-.10
-.15
.02
.13*** -.37***
.00
.00

.01

.01

.38***
.38***

sr2

.33**

.11**

.25***

Self-esteem

.01
.25**
.27**

.07*

.07*

.02

.02

.26*
-.14

Note. Depressed mood was determined by score on the Beck Depression Inventory (BDI); self-esteem
was determined by score on the Rosenberg Self-Esteem Scale. Phi (&) is the measure of compartmentalization. Proportion of negatives was arcsine transformed. BDI scores were square-root transformed. A'= 66.
Six subjects were excluded from these analyses because their importance ratings had no variability, and so
their DI scores were undefined.
*p<.05. **p<.0l. ***p<.00l.

This document is copyrighted by the American Psychological Association or one of its allied publishers.
This article is intended solely for the personal use of the individual user and is not to be disseminated broadly.

COMPARTMENTALIZATION OF THE SELF

1043

ferentially endorsed by depressed and nondepressed individuals.
those conditions that the theoretical model predicts that comThese adjectives also either appear on Derry and Kuiper's (cited in
partmentalized organization will be associated with higher levKuiper, Derry, & MacDonald, 1982) list of adjectives judged to be
els of depression or lower self-esteem.
descriptive of depressed persons or are near synonyms of words on that
The notion that depressed persons have important, frelist (e.g., unloved vs. unwanted). Nine positive trait and mood adjectives
quently accessed aspects of the self that are extremely negative
that were near antonyms of the depressed-content adjectives were sefits well with descriptions of depressive symptomatology. How- lected from Dykman et al.'s list. In addition, 11 positive and 11 negative
ever, the present procedure may not have been successful in
commonly used adjectives were taken from the set used in Studies 1
identifying those aspects. Clearly, the self-concept sorting task
and 2. Thus, the new adjective set included words that were likely to be
used by either depressed or nondepressed subjects (but not both) as
tends to limit subjects' self-aspects to those that are well-dewell as a set of common positive and negative adjectives that most
scribed by the adjectives included in the card deck. Although
subjects would use.
the effects of compartmentalization already described suggest
After completing their sorts, subjects wrote descriptive labels for
that these adjectives did allow individuals some important aleach of their groups and made the following ratings for each selfternatives in the kinds of categories they generated, it is possiaspect, on 7-point Likert scales: (a) How important is this aspect of
ble that they do not permit depressed individuals to generate
yourself for the way you think about yourself? (b) How positive is this
the kinds of negative self-aspects that are most important for
aspect of yourself? and (c) How negative is this aspect of yourself?
5
their self-view. Recall that the set of adjectives used in Studies 1
and 2 were those most commonly reported in the self-descripProcedure
tions of a random sample of subjects. For this reason, the negative adjectives available tend to represent negative feelings or
The procedure was identical to that used in Study 2. Subjects comstates that are transient and not likely to influence global feelpleted the sorting task and filled out the Rosenberg Self-Esteem Scale
ings of self-worth, such as irritable, self-centered, or disorgan- and the BDI.
ized. In contrast, studies of the self-concepts of depressed versus nondepressed persons typically find differences in endorseResults
ment and accessibility of adjectives like hopeless, inadequate,
and unloved or optimistic, capable, and needed (Kuiper, Derry,
Only subjects whose BDI scores at the time of the laboratory
& MacDonald, 1982; Dykman, Abramson, Alloy, & Hartlage,
sessions were consistent with their proneness group were in1989). Such adjectives represent traits and states that are protocluded in the analyses. These were 41 (15 men and 26 women)
typically descriptive of depressed and nondepressed individout of 46 nondepressed subjects and 36 (10 men and 26 women)
uals, respectively. These adjectives, especially the negative ones,
out of 49 depressed subjects. Table 4, Panel B displays the group
would have been excluded from the adjectives used in Studies 1
means on self-esteem and BDI scores, and the same three meaand 2 because they are not common self-descriptors for most
sures of negative content used in Study 2 (proportion of negative
people.
items, average positivity-negativity difference scores across all
self-aspects, and differential importance). As in Study 2, there
were significant differences between depressed and nondeStudy 3
pressed groups on all measures. A comparison of Panel A
(Study 2) and Panel B (Study 3) confirms that the subjects seThe design of Study 3 was identical to that of Study 2, with
lected for the two studies were similar in terms of self-esteem
prone-depressed and not prone-nondepressed subjects seand depressed mood. However, the change in the adjective set
lected by prescreening. The procedure was the same, except for
for Study 3 seems to have affected the sorts generated by the
changes in the adjectives provided for the card sorting task and
depressed group. Although the measures of negative content
minor adjustments in the ratings that subjects provided for each
were quite similar for the nondepressed subjects in both studof their self-aspects.
ies, the depressed subjects in Study 3 differed from the depressed subjects in Study 2 on all three measures. First, the
Method
proportion of negative adjectives in depressed subjects' sorts
jumped from 33% in Study 2 to 44% in Study 3. Although there
Subjects
were more negative adjectives in the card deck for Study 3, this
Twelve hundred introductory psychology students at the University
did not affect the proportion of negatives used by nondepressed
of Wisconsin were screened on the DPI and the BDI during the first
subjects. Second, the average positivity-negativity rating across
week of the semester. The criteria used to select prone-depressed and
groups was closer to zero for the depressed subjects in Study 3.
not prone-nondepressed subjects were the same as those in Study 2.
Third, the depressed subjects' differential importance score in
Forty-nine prone-depressed individuals (17 men and 32 women) and
Study 3 was less than that in Study 2. In fact, 13% of the subjects
46 not prone-nondepressed individuals (19 men and 27 women) participated in the laboratory sessions. (The male-female ratio in each group
in Study 3 had negative values on differential importance, indicorresponds to that available in the sample.) Students received bonus
cating that their negative self-aspects were perceived to be more
credit toward their course grade for participation.
important than their positive ones. These are the conditions
under which the theoretical model predicts that compartmen-

Self-Concept Sorting Task
A set of 20 positive and 20 negative adjectives was constructed for
the sorting task. Nine negative trait and mood adjectives were selected
from Dykman et al.'s (1989) set of bipolar adjective scales that are dif-

5

1 am extremely grateful to both Lyn Abramson and Ben Dykman
for this insightful suggestion.

This document is copyrighted by the American Psychological Association or one of its allied publishers.
This article is intended solely for the personal use of the individual user and is not to be disseminated broadly.

1044

CAROLIN SHOWERS

talization will be associated with relatively high depression
scores or low self-esteem scores.
Table 4 also presents the average compartmentalization
scores for each group. Again, the depressed groups in Studies 2
and 3 differ. Depressed subjects in Study 3 display increased
compartmentalization compared with those in Study 2. It is
important to note that these are raw scores, unadjusted for negative content. With the adjective set used in Study 3, depressed
subjects used more negatives, and they generated self-aspects
that were more negative on average and that were more important to their overall self-concept than those generated by depressed subjects in Study 2. In other words, providing depressed-content adjectives seems to have allowed depressed
subjects to generate negative "compartments" that were highly
important.
The logic of the regression analyses, using measures of content and organization to predict self-esteem and depression
scores, was the same as in Study 2. Table 6 presents the results.
Measures of negative content accounted for 63% and 54% of the
variance in self-esteem and depression scores, respectively, in
Study 3, as compared with 17% and 22% in Study 2. In particular, the average positivity-negativity rating of self-aspects was
significant in Study 3 as was the proportion of negative characteristics.
Differential importance was significant in the case of SelfEsteem Scale scores and appeared as a nonsignificant trend in
the case of BDI scores. This replicates Pelham and Swann's
(1989) finding that differential importance accounts for a
unique portion of the variance in global self-esteem. The combined interactions of differential importance with proportion
of negatives and average positivity of self-aspects were marginally significant in the case of self-esteem. The nature of the
interaction of differential importance with positivity of selfaspects (which is significant at p < .03 if entered alone) was
examined by estimating the slope of the regression of self-esteem on differential importance for high and low values of
positivity of self-aspects (i£., for values one standard deviation
above and below the mean). When positivity of groups is high,
this slope is 0.17; when positivity of groups is low, the slope is
6.79. The interaction, then, is the same as that obtained by
Pelham and Swann; differential importance is only correlated
with self-esteem for individuals with relatively negative selfviews.
Any linear relationship between compartmentalization and
self-esteem or depression is superseded by the significant interaction of phi with differential importance. The nature of this
interaction can be described by estimating the slope of the regression of Self-Esteem Scale scores (or BDI scores) on phi for
different values of differential importance (DI). Table 7 gives
the slopes for values of differential importance that are one
standard deviation above the mean (DI = .88) and one standard
deviation below the mean (DI = .04). In addition, a slope is
calculated for DI = -.35, the average differential importance
for those 10 subjects whose negative self-aspects were rated as
more important than their positive self-aspects (i£., subjects for
whom DI < 0). Table 7 shows that compartmentalization is
associated with higher self-esteem and lower depression scores
when positive self-aspects are highly important (data column 1).
When negative self-aspects are similar in importance to posi-

tives (data column 2) or more important (data column 3), compartmentalization is associated with low self-esteem and high
depression scores.6
Discussion
Although the depressed groups in Studies 2 and 3 were similarly depressed and low in self-esteem, the content and organization of their sorts differed, presumably because of the availability of depressed-content adjectives in the stimuli in Study 3. In
Study 3, depressed subjects used a higher proportion of negative
adjectives in their sorts, evaluated their self-aspects more negatively (on average), and were less likely to rate their positive
self-aspects as more important than their negative ones. These
indicators and the raw compartmentalization scores for depressed subjects suggest that when depressed-content adjectives
are provided, depressed subjects generate negative "compartments" that are important (i.e., central to their overall concept
of themselves).
With this wider range of content in the stimulus adjectives,
the relationship between differential importance and global
self-esteem established by Pelham and Swann (1989) was replicated. Note that in Pelham and Swann's study, subjects were
asked to rate the descriptiveness of positive and negative statements about the self in each of 10 domains provided by the
experimenter. The present findings replicate their results for
categories of self-knowledge that are generated idiographically
by each subject. Evaluating positive categories as more important than negative ones is associated with higher global self-esteem, especially among individuals whose categories are relatively negative.
Most important, Study 3 obtained the interaction of compartmentalization and differential importance predicted by
the theoretical model. When positive self-aspects are perceived
to be highly important, compartmentalized organization is associated with high self-esteem and low depression scores. However, when negative self-aspects are important, then mixed
(noncompartmentalized) organization is associated with more
positive global self-esteem and mood.
Analysis of Self-Aspect Labels: Studies 2 and 3
Having found compartmentalization to be associated with
self-esteem and depressed mood in a manner consistent with
the theoretical model, we turn to an analysis of category labels
to understand better how individuals who compartmentalize
keep positive and negative information separate. In other
words, what kinds of categories do these individuals use?
On one hand, individuals who compartmentalize may generate self-aspects that are broad, global categories (e.g., student,
daughter, and social life) of which they take an affectively "simple" view. Whereas individuals who do not compartmentalize
may include both positive and negative information in categories such as student, daughter, or social life, individuals who
6
Separate regressions for men and women obtained similar results.
For example, for the self-esteem equation, the change in J& for the
interaction of phi and importance (Step 4) was .03 (p < .03, n <= 49) for
women and .04 (p < .17, n = 24) for men.

1045

COMPARTMENTALIZATION OF THE SELF

Table 6
Study 3: Hierarchical Regressions to Predict Depression and Self-Esteem
From Measures ofContent and Organization of the Self
Self-esteem

Depressed mood

This document is copyrighted by the American Psychological Association or one of its allied publishers.
This article is intended solely for the personal use of the individual user and is not to be disseminated broadly.

Cumulative Increase

Predictor

R2

in/? 2

Step 1:
Proportion of negative
items (NI)
Average positivity of
groups (PG)
Differential
importance (DI)
Step 2:
NIXDI
PGxDI

.54***

.54***

Step 3: <t>
Step 4: <t> X DI

.57***
.60***

sr2

sr

Cumulative Increase
R2
in/? 2
.63***

.06**

.25**

.01

.09*** -.31***

-.12

.01
.03*
.03*

.66***
.01
.09
.01
.11
.03* -.16*
.03* -.16*

sr

.63***

.05* -.21*
.55***

sr2

.67***
.69***

.04*

.19*

.02*

.15*

.00
.01
.01
.02*

-.02
-.11
.11
.15*

.03
.01
.02*

Note. Depressed mood was determined by score on the Beck Depression Inventory (BDI); self-esteem
was determined by score on the Rosenberg Self-Esteem Scale. Phi (<t>) is the measure of compartmentalization. Proportion of negatives was arcsine transformed. BDI scores were square-root transformed. N = 73.
Four subjects were excluded from these analyses because their importance ratings had no variability, and
so their differential importance scores were undefined.
*p<.05. **p<.01. ***/><.001.

count for the curvilinear relationship between compartmentalization and depression. In subjects who are low in depression
or high in self-esteem, compartmentalized organization may
be associated with narrowly denned negative aspects, which
have minimal impact on the self. In contrast, in depressed subjects who compartmentalize, negative self-aspects may be more
broadly defined, with greater impact on the self.
These predictions are consistent with literature on levels of
thinking (e.g., Vallacher & Wegner, 1985) that suggests that it
may be advantageous to focus on concrete and specific features
of difficult actions (Vallacher, Wegner, & Somoza, 1989) or
stressful events (Pennebaker, Czajka, Cropanzano, & Richards,
1990). Similarly, Zirkel and Cantor (1990) report that identifying the life task of being on one's own at college in terms of
concrete, narrowly defined activities is associated with less anxiety and absorption in that task than is thinking in terms that
give the task broader meaning.
Table 7
The predictions were tested by coding the labels that subjects
Slopes for the Regression of Rosenberg Self-Esteem Scale and in Studies 2 and 3 had generated for their self-aspects along two
Beck Depression Inventory Scores on Compartmentalization dimensions: breadth and type of domain (see following discusas a Function of Differential Importance (DI)
sion). Measures of the average breadth for positive self-aspects
and for negative self-aspects in situational and self-domains
DI (range: - 1 to 1)
were computed for each subject. The relationship between
High
Low
Very low
compartmentalization and breadth of self-aspects was examPredicted variable
(DI = .88) (DI = .04) (DI = -.35)
ined by multiple regression analysis.

compartmentalize may take an all-or-nothing perspective,
identifying either all positive or all negative characteristics with
each self-aspect. Such broadly denned categories might tend to
have broad impacts on the self.
Alternatively, compartmentalized organization may be associated with the use of narrowly denned self-aspects (e.g., "me
when I'm being productive at work" or "me before exams"). The
specific definition of the category constrains the characteristics
to be only positive or only negative. When categories are narrow
in scope (i.e., those self-aspects are experienced in a limited
range of situations or on a limited number of occasions), the
impact on the self will likely be narrow as well.
Thus, the relative breadth of positive and negative categories
may correspond to their differential importance and may ac-

Rosenberg Self-Esteem Scale
Beck Depression Inventory

9.21
-2.48

-4.55
0.65

-10.95
2.11

Note. Slopes are based on unstandardized regression coefficients
(5s) and BDI scores were square-root transformed. For DI, M = 0.46
and SD =0.42. The high and low values in columns 1 and 2 correspond
to 1 SD above and below the mean, respectively. The very low value in
column 3 is the average DI for those 10 subjects who rated their negative aspects as more important than their positives (i.e., DI < 0).

Coding Procedure for Self-Aspect Labels
The breadth of each self-aspect was coded on a 5-point scale.
A broad self-aspect was defined as one that encompassed many
occasions and situational contexts (Carter & Showers, 1992).
Coders were given definitions and examples for each point on
the rating scale, ranging from 1 {single occasions or specific situa-

This document is copyrighted by the American Psychological Association or one of its allied publishers.
This article is intended solely for the personal use of the individual user and is not to be disseminated broadly.

1046

CAROLIN SHOWERS

tions with special circumstances, e.g. "how I felt about my chemis- partial r = -.40, p < .04). Again, the negative situational selftryfinal")to 5 (generalization about the selfas a whole or about aspects of subjects who compartmentalize were more narrowly
a set ofcharacteristics; no situational context, e.g. "my personal- defined than those of subjects who did not compartmentalize.
ity"). Two undergraduate coders who were blind to the hypothe- None of the other breadth measures was correlated with phi.
ses and design, as well as to the depression status of the subjects,
The results of the domain analyses supported and extended
coded each label for each subject who had been included in the
those obtained for Study 2. Hierarchical regressions revealed
analyses of Study 2 or Study 3. Altogether, there were 1,161
that subjects who compartmentalize generated a greater numlabels. Coders obtained 87.3% agreement. Disagreements were
ber of self (evaluative) aspects (p < .001) and somewhat more
resolved by majority rule after the disputed item had been
self (nonevaluative) aspects (p <. 10). They also generated fewer
coded by two additional judges. There were 5 labels that could
family (p < .001) and miscellaneous activities aspects (p < .01).
not be coded because of their ambiguity.
Moreover, in this data set that utilized the sorting task with
The domains coded were achievement, social (nonfamily),
depressed and nondepressed content adjectives, subjects who
family, miscellaneous activities, self (evaluative) and self (nonecompartmentalize generated a greater number of self-aspects
valuative). The two self domains included labels that did not
on average (AR2 = .07, p < .04), albeit with fewer domains
specify a clear situational context (e.g., "my personality" or "relirepresented per group (AR2 = .08, p < .02). These were all main
able"). Self-evaluative labels had a clear evaluative tone (e.g.,
effects of compartmentalization; there were no significant in"things I like about myself or "sad"). Descriptive definitions
teractions of phi with differential importance.
were written for each domain. Two coders who were blind to
the hypotheses and design of the study, as well as to the subjects'
Discussion
depression status, coded each label for each subject. All but 4 of
the 1,161 labelsfitinto one of the six domains described earlier.
The results of the labels coding for Study 3 provide a sketch of
Coders obtained 91.7% agreement. Disagreements were rethe self-aspects of individuals who compartmentalize. Their
solved by a third judge.
negative situational categories were relatively narrow and speThe labels for self-aspects that fall into the "self domains are
cific; this is consistent with the finding that these subjects genbroader than those in the various situational domains because
erated more categories representing fewer domains. Ifone's cate"self aspects are context free. Because of this and also because
gories are narrowly defined, one can easily generate several in
not all individuals have all domains represented in their sorts,
each domain. Similarly, in Study 2, subjects who compartmenfour breadth scores were computed for each subject by averagtalized had negative situational categories that were narrowly
ing the breadth codings for those self-aspects that fit into each
defined. In both studies, these subjects generated more self
of the following groups: positive situations (PosSit), negative
(evaluative) categories (e.g., "things I would like to be" or "sad").
situations (NegSit), positive self (PosSelf) and negative self (NegSurprisingly, there were no interactions of compartmentalSelf). (The positivity or negativity of each category was deterization with differential importance on these measures. Conmined by the subjects' own reports. Categories that were persistent with predictions, nondepressed individuals who comceived to be equally positive and negative were excluded.) These
partmentalize have narrowly defined negative aspects (which
four variables were then used as dependent variables in four
are presumably low in importance); however, depressed individmultiple regressions where the predictors were the same as
uals who compartmentalize apparently also have narrowly dethose used in the regression equations for self-esteem and defined negative aspects, even though it was seen previously that
pression scores.
these aspects are relatively important. Thus, the importance
ratings these subjects give to their negative aspects seem inconResults: Study 2
sistent with their narrowly defined labels. Their negative situationally based aspects may have great impact on mood and
Only one of the breadth variables, NegSit, showed a significant association with compartmentalized organization (<t>: self-esteem not because they are broadly defined, but perhaps
because they are (mistakenly?) perceived to be highly imporAR2 =.11, partial r = -.35, p < .04). The negative situational
tant. In other words, these subjects may not err in the way they
self-aspects of subjects who compartmentalize were more narrowly defined than those of subjects who did not compartmenorganize their self-aspects, but rather in the importance they
talize (e.g., "when I get a bad grade" vs. "student").
assign to narrow, situation-specific negative self-aspects (e.g.,
"me during finals week").
In addition, separate regressions using the same set of predictors examined the relationship between compartmentalization
and the number of groups, number of groups per domain, and
General Discussion
the types of domains generated. These analyses suggested that
subjects who compartmentalize generated more self (evaluative)
In the first two studies, organization of positive and negative
aspects (AR2 = .04, partial r = .22, p < .10) and fewer family
characteristics of the self into separate, evaluatively compartaspects (AR2 = . 14, partial r = -.39, p < .002) than did subjects mentalized self-aspects was associated with high self-esteem
who did not compartmentalize. There were no significant difand low depression scores. In these studies, the stimulus adjecferences in the number of groups or the number of groups per
tives that subjects used to generate their self-aspects were comdomain.
mon positive and negative self-descriptors. However, in Study 3,
when a wider range of content (including both depressed-conResults: Study 3
tent adjectives and their antonyms) was used, the relationship
between compartmentalization and self-esteem or depression
As was the case for Study 2, NegSit showed a significant association with compartmentalized organization (<j>: AR2 = .15, was found to be more complex. Consistent with the theoretical

This document is copyrighted by the American Psychological Association or one of its allied publishers.
This article is intended solely for the personal use of the individual user and is not to be disseminated broadly.

COMPARTMENTALIZATION OF THE SELF

model, the relationship between compartmentalization and
self-esteem or depression was mediated by the relative importance of positive and negative self-aspects: When positive selfaspects were perceived to be highly important, compartmentalized organization was associated with high self-esteem and low
levels of depression; when negative self-aspects were important,
compartmentalization was associated with low self-esteem and
high levels of depression.
As suggested in the introduction, the categorical organization of self-knowledge may be both cause and consequence of
global self-views or mood state. When positive self-aspects are
important, compartmentalization may contribute to positive
feelings because activation of those important self-aspects
brings to mind only positive knowledge about the self. Conversely, when negative knowledge about the self is important, it
may be better to form self-aspects which contain a mixture of
positive and negative information. Each time negatives are activated, there will be some positive knowledge associated with
the same self-aspect that can buffer affective and cognitive reactions to the negative knowledge.7
Alternatively, extreme mood states or extremely positive or
negative self-views may increase compartmentalization. The
processes may be either affective or cognitive. For example,
extreme affective states may strengthen the associative links
between items of similarly valenced knowledge in memory,
causing them to be activated together (Bower, 1981) or extreme
affective states may make the affective valence of items of information about the self particularly salient, so that affective valence is likely to be used as a basis for cognitive categorization
(Pietromonaco, 1985; cf. also Niedenthal & Cantor, 1986).
One might say that individuals who compartmentalize display less evaluative complexity in their organization of selfknowledge than do those who use evaluatively mixed categories. Informational items of opposite valence are not likely to be
integrated under the same category label. Yet this evaluative
simplicity is probably achieved by cognitive complexity (cf.
Schroder, Driver, & Streufert, 1967; Tetlock & Kim, 1987).
Broad-based categories such as "social life" or "academics"
must be differentiated into more specific categories such as
"myself when I am not doing well in school" to create an evaluatively simple, compartmentalized organization.
Interestingly, a correlation between compartmentalization
and narrow definition of self-aspects was observed only for negative (but not positive) self-aspects. Narrowly defined negative
self-aspects should prevent overgeneralization of negative characteristics (cf. Carver & Ganellan, 1983; Kernis, Brockner, &
Frankel, 1989). They should be less likely to be perceived as
stable or as having global impact and therefore less likely to lead
to feelings of helplessness about negative events (Abramson,
Metalsky, & Alloy, 1989). Hence, learning to define one's negative self-aspects in narrow terms may be beneficial. Compartmentalized individuals may define positive self-aspects either
narrowly (like their negatives) or more broadly (to gain the benefits of generalization of positive characteristics).
For most nondepressed individuals, the relative importance
of positive self-aspects implies that compartmentalization
should be associated with high self-esteem. Thus, for most people, learning to compartmentalize negative characteristics
("not good at team sports") may help strengthen and protect
positives ("like to jog for exercise"). However, when negative
aspects are highly important (e.g., if peer pressure dictates join-

1047

ing the volleyball team), then an evaluatively integrative organization that links negative knowledge (about playing team
sports) to a positive view of the self (as physically fit) may be
optimal.
Of course, compartmentalization effects do not belie the fact
that sheer amount of negative content (as well as the average
positivity or negativity of self-aspects) have strong associations
with depressed mood and self-esteem. In fact, for individuals
whose positive self-aspects are most important, compartmentalization may be part of a process by which negative information
is "removed" from the self-concept (e.g., if the corresponding
negative self-aspects were perceived to be less and less important over a period of time). However, the organization of the self
may also have treatment implications for individuals who have
important negative knowledge that is not easily "removed" or
denied. Perhaps even clinically depressed individuals may benefit from learning to integrate their negative self-aspects with
more positive features of the self. If sufficient positive information is available, evaluative integration should increase its accessibility. Unfortunately, clinical diagnoses were not available for
the present samples, and only 50% (Study 2) and 42% (Study 3)
of depressed subjects were moderately to severely depressed
(i£., BDI scores > 15). Recent studies by Pelham (1991) found
that persons who are severely depressed (on the basis of their
BDI scores) do have isolated, yet highly positive, self-views that
may help them overcome their depression.
The perceived importance of self-aspects plays a critical role
in this model. However, a direct relationship between importance and self-esteem or depression was not always apparent (cf.
Hoge & McCarthy, 1984; Marsh, 1986). It was only in Study 3
that a significant correlation between importance and self-esteem was observed. However "importance" does seem to be
important in its interaction with compartmentalization. Differential importance is a strong predictor of depression and
self-esteem for individuals who are highly compartmentalized.
Perhaps individuals who have differentiated the aspects of
themselves along evaluative lines rely on differential weights of
importance to keep their negative aspects at bay. Similarly, Pelham and Swann (1989) found that importance was related to
self-esteem only for individuals with relatively negative selfviews. Thus, compartmentalized categorization, accompanied
by differential importance ratings that weight positive selfaspects heavily, may allow individuals with many negative beliefs about the self to acknowledge that negative information
without being overwhelmed by it. Some examples of this might
be the acknowledgement of "pockets of incompetence" that, if
identified as unimportant for one's areas of competence, may
actually increase perceptions of self-worth (Taylor & Brown,
1988) or the case of low self-esteem individuals who seemingly
ignore their global self-evaluations in seeking to verify specific
positive self-views (Swann, Pelham, & Krull, 1989).
Related studies of evaluative integration of positive and nega7

In the present studies, the measure of compartmentalization always preceded the measures of self-esteem and depression. This leaves
open the possibility that the sorting task itself raised or lowered self-esteem or mood (depending on the degree of compartmentalization and
the importance of positives and negatives). If this were the case, it
would still imply that the way one organizes self-knowledge in that task
has a systematic influence on reports of mood and self-esteem.

This document is copyrighted by the American Psychological Association or one of its allied publishers.
This article is intended solely for the personal use of the individual user and is not to be disseminated broadly.

1048

CAROLIN SHOWERS

tive self-descriptive information have obtainedfindingsconsistent with the present data (Showers, in press). In that work,
subjects spontaneously generated lists of self-descriptive information. Subjects who intermixed positive and negative characteristics in their self-descriptive lists were identified as evaluatively integrated. Among those subjects who had important negative characteristics in their self-descriptions, those who were
evaluatively integrated had higher self-esteem or less negative
affect than those who listed groups of positives and groups of
negatives, even when the number of positives and negatives was
held constant. However, the individuals who were highest in
self-esteem listed groups of positives only. Although those studies focused on the associative links between oppositely valenced items of self-descriptive information, rather than on category structures, both approaches suggest that grouping information of similar valence together is advantageous only when
positive characteristics are highly important. Integrating positive and negative information is preferable when negative information is important or frequently accessed.
In summary, the present data (and also the findings of
Showers, in press) demonstrate that organization of self-knowledge may be importantly related to self-esteem and affect and
that it is not just the positive and negative content of self-knowledge that matters. The organizational model proposed here
may have important implications for the treatment of individuals whose negative knowledge about the self is debilitating.
The present work suggests that negative knowledge about the
self need not necessarily be changed or denied. This insight
may be especially helpful in light of recent empirical work on
depressive realism (Alloy, Albright, Abramson, & Dykman,
1990). If a depressed person's negative beliefs about the self are
realistic, reorganization of negative knowledge may be a more
effective means of improving self-evaluation and affect than
attempts to change the content of realistic beliefs. Organizational strategies may be used to maximize access to whatever
positive characteristics are available. However, the kind of organization—compartmentalization or integration—that is most
advantageous depends on the relative importance of positive
and negative characteristics of the self. Thus, the present findings suggest that keeping one's bad apples out of the bunch may
be advantageous, as long as they do not represent highly important aspects of the self.

Beck, A. T., Ward, C. H., Mendelson, M., Mock, J., & Erbaugh, J.
(1961). An inventory for measuring depression. Archives of General
Psychiatry, 4, 561-571.
Blaney, P. H. (1986). Affect and memory: A review. Psychological Bulletin, 99, 229-246.
Bower, G. H. (1970). Organizational factors in memory. Cognitive Psychology, 1,18-46.
Bower, G. H. (1981). Mood and memory. American Psychologist, 36,
129-148.
Bowlby, J. (1980). Attachment and loss: Vol. 3. Loss, sadness and depression. New York: Basic Books.
Cantor, N., Markus, H., Niedenthal, P., & Nurius, P. (1986). On motivation and the self-concept. In R. M. Sorrentino & E. T. Higgins (Eds.),
Handbook of motivation and cognition: Foundations ofsocial behavior (pp. 96-121). New York: Guilford Press.
Carter, S. M., & Showers, C. (1992, May). The paradox of defensive
pessimism and its relation to the self-concept. Paper presented at the
Annual Meeting of the Midwestern Psychological Association, Chicago.
Carver, C. S., & Ganellen, R. J. (1983). Depression and components of
self-punitiveness: High standards, self-criticism, and overgeneralization. Journal of Abnormal Psychology, 92, 330-337.
Carver, C. S., & Scheier, M. F. (1990). Principles of self-regulation:
Action and emotion. In E. T. Higgins & R. M. Sorrentino (Eds.),
Handbook ofmotivation and cognition, (Vol. 2, pp. 3-52). New York:
Guilford Press.
Cramer, H. (1974). Mathematical methods ofstatistics. Princeton, NJ:
Princeton University Press. (Original work published 1945)
Dykman, B. M., Abramson, L. Y, Alloy, L. B., & Hartlage, S. (1989).
Processing of ambiguous and unambiguous feedback by depressed
and nondepressed college students: Schematic biases and their implications for depressive realism. Journal of Personality and Social
Psychology, 56, 431-445.
Epstein, S. (1973). The self-concept revisited: Or a theory of a theory.
American Psychologist, 28, 404-416.
Everitt, B. S. (1977). The analysis ofcontingency tables. London: Chapman & Hall.
Greenwald, A. G, & Pratkanis, A. R. (1984). The self. In R. S. Wyer &
T. K. Srull (Eds.), Handbook ofsocial cognition (Vol. 3, pp. 129-178).
Hillsdale, NJ: Erlbaum.
Harter, S. (1988). Developmental and dynamic changes in the nature of
the self-concept. In S. R. Shirk (Ed.), Cognitive development and child
psychotherapy. New York: Plenum Press.
Hastie, R. (1980). Memory for information that confirms or contradicts a general impression. In R. Hastie, T. M. Ostrom, E. B. Ebbesen, R. S. Wyer, Jr., D. L. Hamilton, & D. E. Carlston (Eds.), Person
memory.Thecognitivebasis ojsocial perception (pp. 155-178). HillsReferences
dale, NJ: Erlbaum.
Abramson, L. Y., Metalsky, G. I, & Alloy, L. B. (1989). Hopelessness
Higgins, E. X, & Bargh, J. A. (1987). Social cognition and social perdepression: A theory-based subtype of depression. Psychological Reception. Annual Review of Psychology, 38, 369-425.
view, 96, 358-372.
Higgins, E. X, King, G. A., & Mavin, G. H. (1982). Individual construct
Alloy, L. B., Albright, J. S., Abramson, L. Y, & Dykman, B. M. (1990).
accessibility and subjective impressions and recall. Journal of PersonDepressive realism and nondepressive optimistic illusions: The role
ality and Social Psychology, 43, 35-47.
of the self. In R. E. Ingram (Ed.), Contemporary psychological ap- Higgins, E. X, Van Hook, E., & Dorfman, D. (1988). Do self-attributes
proaches to depression: Treatment, research and theory (pp. 71-86). form a cognitive structure? Social Cognition, 6, 177-206.
New \brk: Plenum Press.
Hoge, D. R., & McCarthy, J. D. (1984). Influence of individual and
Alloy, L. B., Hartlage, S., Metalsky, G., & Abramson, L. Y. (1989). The
group identity salience in the global self-esteem of youth. Journal of
Depression Proneness Inventory: A brief, face-valid scale ofvulnerabil- Personality and Social Psychology, 47, 403-414.
ity to depressive reactions in response to stress. Unpublished manu- James, W (1890). Principles of psychology New York: Holt.
script.
Kendall, P. C, & Hollon, S. D. (1981). Assessing self-referent speech:
Bargh, J. A., & Tota, M. E. (1988). Context-dependent automatic proMethods in the measurement of self-statements. In P. C. Kendall &
cessing in depression: Accessibility of negative constructs with reS. D. Hollon (Eds.), Assessment strategies for cognitive-behavioral
gard to self but not others. Journal ofPersonality and Social Psycholinterventions (pp. 85-118). San Diego, CA: Academic Press.
ogy, 54, 925-939.
Kernis, M. H., Brockner, J., & Frankel, B. S. (1989). Self-esteem and
Beck, A. T. (1976). Cognitive therapy and the emotional disorders. Mad- reactions to failure: The mediating role of overgeneralization. Jourison, CT: International Universities Press.
nal of Personality and Social Psychology, 57, 707-714.

This document is copyrighted by the American Psychological Association or one of its allied publishers.
This article is intended solely for the personal use of the individual user and is not to be disseminated broadly.

COMPARTMENTALIZATION OF THE SELF

1049

Salovey, P., & Singer, J. A. (1991). Mood congruency effects in recall of
Kihlstrom, J. F., & Cantor, N. (1984). Mental representations of the
childhood versus recent memories. In D. Kuiken (Ed.), Mood and
self. Advances in Experimental Social Psychology, 17,1-47.
memory: Theory, research, and applications (pp. 99-120). Newbury
Kim, M. P., & Rosenberg, S. (1980). Comparison of two structural
Park, CA: Sage.
models of implicit personality theory. Journal ofPersonality and SoSchlenker, B. R., & Weigold, M. F (1989). Goals and the self-identificacial Psychology, 38, 375-389.
tion process: Constructing desired identities. In L. A. Pervin (Ed.),
Klein, S. B., & Kihlstrom, J. F. (1986). Elaboration, organization, and
Goal concepts in personality and social psychology (pp. 243-290).
the self-reference effect in memory. Journal ofExperimental PsycholHillsdale, NJ: Erlbaum.
ogy: General, 115, 26-38.
Schroder, H. M., Driver, M. X, & Streufert, S. (1967). Human informaKuiper, N. A., Derry, P. A., & MacDonald, M. R. (1982). Self-reference
tion processing. New \brk: Holt, Rinehart & Winston.
and person perception in depression: A social cognition perspective.
In G. Weary & H. L. Mirels (Eds.), Integrations ofclinical and social Schwartz, R. M. (1986). The internal dialogue: On the asymmetry between positive and negative coping thoughts. Cognitive Therapy and
psychology (pp. 79-103). New York: Oxford University Press.
Research, 10, 591-605.
Linville, P. W (1985). Self-complexity and affective extremity: Don't
put all of your eggs in one cognitive basket. Social Cognition, 3, Segal, Z. Y (1988). Appraisal of the self-schema construct in cognitive
models of depression. Psychological Bulletin, 103,147-162.
94-120.
Segal, Z. V, Hood, J. E., Shaw, B. F, & Higgins, E. T. (1988). A structural
Linville, P. W. (1987). Self-complexity as a cognitive buffer against
analysis of the self-schema construct in major depression. Cognitive
stress-related illness and depression. Journal of Personality and SoTherapy and Research, 12, 471-485.
cial Psychology, 52, 663-676.
Markus, H., & Nurius, P. (1986). Possible selves. American Psycholo- Showers, C. (in press). Evaluatively integrative thinking about characteristics of the self. Personality and Social Psychology Bulletin.
gist, 41, 954-969.
Spielman, L. A., & Bargh, J. A. (1990). Does the depressive self-schema
Markus, H., & Wurf, E. (1987). The dynamic self-concept: A social
really exist? In C. D. McCann & N. S. Endler (Eds.), Depression: New
psychological perspective. Annual Review of Psychology, 38, 299directions in theory, research, and practice (pp. 111-126). Toronto,
337.
Canada: Wall & Emerson.
Marsh, H. W (1986). Global self-esteem: Its relation to specific facets
of self-concept and their importance. Journal ofPersonality and So- Srull, T. K. (1983). Organizational and retrieval processes in person
memory: An examination of processing objectives, presentation forcial Psychology, 51,1224-1236.
mat, and the possible role of self-generated retrieval cues. Journal of
Mayer, J. D., Gayle, M., Meehan, M. E., & Haarman, A.-K. (1990).
Personality and Social Psychology, 44,1157-1170.
Toward better specification of the mood-congruency effect in reStrauman, T. J., & Higgins, E. T. (1987). Automatic activation of selfcall. Journal of Experimental Social Psychology, 26, 465-480.
discrepancies and emotional syndromes: When cognitive structures
Niedenthal, P. M., & Cantor, N. (1986). Affective responses as guides to
influence affect. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 53,
category-based inferences. Motivation and Emotion, 10, 217-232.
1004-1014.
Niedenthal, P. M, Setterlund, M. B., & Wherry, M. B. (in press). PossiStryker, S. (1980). Symbolic interactionism. Menlo Park, CA: Benjable self-complexity and affective reactions to goal-relevant evaluamin/Cummings.
tion. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology.
Ogilvie, D. M. (1987). The undesired self: A neglected variable in per- Sullivan, H. S. (1953). The interpersonal theory ofpsychiatry. New \brk:
sonality research. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 52, Norton.
Swann, W B., Jr., Pelham, B. W, & Krull, D. S. (1989). Agreeable fancy
379-385.
or disagreeable truth? Reconciling self-enhancement and self-verifiOyserman, D., & Markus, H. R. (1990). Possible selves and delincation. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 57, 782-791.
quency. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 59,112-125.
Taylor, S. E., & Brown, J. D. (1988). Illusion and well-being: A social
Pelham, B. W (1991). On the benefits of misery: Self-serving biases in
psychological perspective on mental health. Psychological Bulletin,
the depressive self-concept. JournalofPersonality and Social Psychol103,193-210.
ogy, 61, 670-681.
Tetlock, P. E., & Kim, J. I. (1987). Accountability and judgment proPelham, B. W, & Swann, Jr., W B. (1989). From self-conceptions to
cesses in a personality prediction task. Journal of Personality and
self-worth: On the sources and structure of global self-esteem. JourSocial Psychology, 52, 700-709.
nal of Personality and Social Psychology, 57, 672-680.
Tulving, E., & Pearlstone, Z. (1966). Availability versus accessibility of
Pennebaker, J. W, Czajka, J. A., Cropanzano, R., & Richards, B. C.
information in memory for words. Journal of Verbal Learning and
(1990). Levels of thinking. Personality and Social Psychology BulleVerbal Behavior, 5, 381-391.
tin, 16, 743-757.
Vallacher, R. R., & Wegner, D. M. (1985). A theory ofaction identificaPietromonaco, P. R. (1985). The influence of affect on self-perception
tion. Hillsdale, NJ: Erlbaum.
in depression. Social Cognition, 3,121-134.
Vallacher, R. R., Wegner, D. M., & Somoza, M. P. (1989). That's easy for
Rogers, T. B. (1981). A model of the self as an aspect of the human
you to say: Action identification and speech fluency. Journal of Perinformation processing system. In N. Cantor & J. F. Kihlstrom
(Eds.), Personality, cognition, and social interaction (pp. 193-214). sonality and Social Psychology, 56,199-208.
Wurf, E., & Markus, H. (1990). Possible selves and the psychology of
Hillsdale, NJ: Erlbaum.
personal growth. In A. Stewart, D. Ozer, & J. M. Healy, Jr. (Eds.),
Rosenberg, M. (1965). Society and the adolescent self-image. PrincePerspectives in personality (Vol. 3, Part A, pp. 39-62). London: Jeston, NJ: Princeton University Press.
sica Kingsley.
Rosenberg, S. (1988). Self and others: Studies in social personality and
autobiography. Advances in Experimental Social Psychology, 21, 57- Zirkel, S., & Cantor, N. (1990). Personal construal of life tasks: Those
who struggle for independence. Journal of Personality and Social
95.
Psychology, 58,172-196.
Ross, M. J. (1989). Self-schematic instability in mild depression. Journal ofSocial Behavior and Personality, 4,119-126.
Received June 25,1991
Ruvolo, A. P., & Markus, H. (1986, August). Possible selves and motivaRevision received September 19,1991
tion. Paper presented at the 94th Annual Convention of the American Psychological Association, Washington, DC.
Accepted October 26,1991 •

