J Happiness Stud
DOI 10.1007/s10902-015-9656-2

RESEARCH PAPER



Positive Time: Balanced Time Perspective and Positive
Orientation

Małgorzata Sobol-Kwapinska1 •
Tomasz Jankowski1




 The Author(s) 2015. This article is published with open access at Springerlink.com


Abstract The aim of the research presented in this article is to investigate the relationship
between positive orientation and time perspective as outlined by Zimbardo and Boyd (J Pers
Soc Psychol 77:1271–1288, 1999) and extended by an additional form of concentration on the
present. The Polish version of the Zimbardo Time Perspective Inventory was used. A third
type of present time perspective, namely active concentration on the present, was measured
by the Carpe Diem Scale. One hundred and eighty five Polish people (non-students) partic-
ipated in a survey to which a canonical-correlation analysis and a cluster analysis were
applied. Positive orientation was correlated with a balanced temporal profile comprising a
strong positive past orientation, moderate concentration on the future, poor fatalistic time
perspective, poor concentration on the negative past and moderate active concentration on the
present. Whereas a positive orientation is based on a general positive attitude towards life and
self, a balanced time perspective reflects a general positive attitude towards time, in which an
active concentration on the present plays an important role.

Keywords Time perspective  Positive orientation  Balanced time perspective 
Carpe Diem


1 Introduction

The question of optimal attitude towards time preoccupies both researchers and also
ordinary people trying to pursue happiness in everyday life. Some people believe that
happiness means positive memories, while others assume that happiness comes down to
achieving goals and planning for the future. There are also people who live according to
the principle that only the ‘here and now’ gives pleasure. One might say that people seek



& Małgorzata Sobol-Kwapinska
  sobol@kul.pl
1
    Department of Personality Psychology, Catholic University of Lublin, al. Raclawickie 14,
    20-950 Lublin, Poland


                                                                                           123
                                                               M. Sobol-Kwapinska, T. Jankowski


happiness in different time perspectives (TP). Is it right, however, to attach significance to
only one of the time dimensions (the past, the present or the future) and belittle the
importance of the other dimensions? In other words, is it sufficient to study the relation-
ships among the various dimensions of TP and a sense of happiness separately from other
temporal dimensions? It seems that it is more reliable to analyse a given time dimension in
the context of other attitudes towards time. For example, when a deep positive concen-
tration on the past is combined with a deep concentration on the future, its relationship with
well-being will be different than if it were combined with a poor concentration on the
future. One might assume that an analysis of a person’s temporal profile, that is, an analysis
of intensity of particular elements of the TP structure, is an important source of knowledge
about that person.

1.1 Time Perspective

The concept of TP as presented by Zimbardo (Boniwell and Zimbardo 2004; Zimbardo and
Boyd 1999, 2008) constitutes the theoretical basis for this study. According to this concept,
cognitive processes divide human experience into past, present and future temporal frames
(D’Alessio et al. 2003; Nuttin and Lens 1985; Zimbardo and Boyd 1999). When one of
these frames affects human behaviour, we refer to TP or temporal orientation (TO) (Ryack
2012; Zimbardo and Boyd 1999). TP is defined as the subjective, often unconscious,
manner in which a person refers to time, the process by which the continual flow of
personal and social experience is assigned to each temporal category (Boyd and Zimbardo
2005). Zimbardo and Boyd (1999) distinguished five types of TP: concentration on neg-
ative past; concentration on positive past; hedonistic concentration on present; fatalistic
concentration on present, and concentration on future. People who concentrate on a neg-
atively perceived past often think back to sad moments from the past. They remember
mostly unpleasant events, traumas and disappointments from the past. Concentration on
positively evaluated events from the past links with thinking with pleasure about the past,
paying attention primarily to the good things that have happened and collecting memo-
rabilia from the past. Hedonistic concentration on the pleasure of the ‘here and now’ is
associated with disregard for experiences from the past. Persons with this hedonistic TP
often focus on pleasure, regardless of the consequences of their own actions. For them,
pleasure is the most important thing in life, even given the risks involved. A fatalistic TP is
a passive persistence in the present stemming from a conviction that people are unable to
influence the future. People with a fatalistic concentration on the present believe that
everything in life depends on destiny, so the only thing left to do is to passively stand in the
present. People who are concentrated on future are interested in what will happen and
attach significance primarily to planning, formulating and achieving goals. They often
think with pleasure about their own future, make plans for it, dream about it and formulate
goals for this future (Zimbardo and Boyd 1999, 2008). The fatalistic and hedonistic
temporal attitudes do not cover all possible types within the present TP. In our studies we
also dealt with a third kind of present TP, the active concentration on the present (Carpe
Diem; Sobol-Kwapinska 2009, 2013).


1.2 Active Concentration on the Present

This type of TP is defined as full concentration of attention on the ‘here and now’,
combined with perceiving the value of each moment, a unique, one-of-a-kind moment.


123
Positive Time: Balanced Time Perspective and Positive…


There are two aspects of active concentration on the present: focusing attention on what is
happening ‘here and now’ and the awareness of the value of each moment of life. Such an
attitude does not imply negligence of the past and disregard for consequences of the
present situation, which is typical of hedonistic orientation. The point is to free oneself
from an incriminatory past or from absorbing thoughts about what is to happen in a
moment. Focusing attention on the moment allows full presence in the now, which is
combined with the feeling of freshness and spontaneity in the perception of reality.
Recognising the value and uniqueness of each moment of life often comes from reflection
on the transience of life. People with active concentration on the present are able to fully
concentrate on the ‘here and now’. They like concentrating on the present, and they
recognise the value of such attitude towards time (Sobol-Kwapinska 2009, 2013).

1.3 The Relationship Between the Time Perspective Dimensions
    and the Quality of Functioning

The literature abounds with many results that describe the relationship between a specific
attitude towards a given dimension of time and the quality of psychological functioning.
Most studies focus on the relationship between concentration on the future and various
measures of well-being. Wills et al. (2001), using measures relating to a theory of coping
with stress, discovered a positive relationship between concentration on the future and a
sense of control and positive affect. Similarly, Zaleski et al. (2001) found that having long-
term goals correlated positively with various measures of well-being, especially with a
sense of meaning in life, a sense of self-efficacy in social relations, and with realism.
Concentration on the future correlated with health-oriented behaviours, such as having
preventive screenings (Boyd and Zimbardo 2005), optimism (Zimbardo and Boyd 1999)
and academic achievements (Barber et al. 2009; Boyd and Zimbardo 2005; Nosal and
Bajcar 2004). At the same time, a very deep concentration on the future may entail reduced
spontaneity and a relative inability to enjoy the ‘here and now’ (Boniwell and Zimbardo
2004; Sobol-Kwapinska 2009, 2013; Zimbardo and Boyd 2008).
    Recent studies show that the positive past correlates positively with high self-esteem, a
sense of security and happiness, having social support, agreeableness and energy (Bryant
et al. 2005; Lyubomirsky and Nolen-Hoeksema 1995; Zimbardo and Boyd 1999). Negative
past is correlated with depression, anxiety and low self-esteem, in addition to problems
with establishing social relations, and various addictions (Klingemann 2001; Lyubomirsky
and Nolen-Hoeksema 1995; Nolen-Hoeksema and Morrow 1993; Zimbardo and Boyd
1999).
    Concentration on the present, both fatalistic and hedonistic, correlates positively with
risky behaviours, such as excessively fast driving (Zimbardo et al. 1997), alcohol con-
sumption and drug abuse (Daugherty and Brase 2010; Keough et al. 1999; Rothspan and
Read 1996; Strathman et al. 1994). The results of studies carried out by Sobol-Kwapinska
(2009, 2013) revealed a significantly positive relationship between active concentration on
the present and having a sense of satisfaction with life, a sense of meaning in life, expe-
riencing positive emotions, and perceiving time as creative and friendly.
    Summing up this brief review, it seems that a concentration on the positive past and the
future as well as an active concentration on the present are dimensions that correlate with
the positive aspects of people’s functioning, whereas a fatalistic TP and a concentration on
a negatively perceived past have particularly negative consequences.




                                                                                   123
                                                              M. Sobol-Kwapinska, T. Jankowski


1.4 Balanced Time Perspective

Recent studies on the relationship between TP and well-being focus on issues related to the
so-called balanced time perspective (BTP). The importance of temporal balance has been
brought up before; for example, Shostrom (1974) used the term ‘time competence’ as an
essential element of a self-updating personality. According to Shostrom, a self-updating
person is primarily characterised by time competence and therefore is able to fully live
‘here and now’. Such an individual is able to link the past with the future in the present and
seems to be less constrained by a sense of guilt, grief and anger from the past, while
aspirations are linked with the goals being worked on. Shostrom (1974) emphasised the
inadequacy of concentrating on only one of the three dimensions of time. Lennings et al.
(1998), applying a canonical analysis, obtained two canonical functions showing inde-
pendent sets of relationships between the different characteristics of temporal perspective
and the selected personality variables. One of them contains an update temporal profile
(characterised by a broad future-oriented perspective, positive attitude towards time and a
strong sense of the passage of time), while the other contains a set of variables that might
be interpreted as an atomistic temporal profile (concentration on the present and the nearest
future without integration of the past into the future). People characterised by individual
profiles differ from one another, for example in terms of the ability to postpone gratifi-
cation and self-control (which is higher in the updating profile).
    According to Zimbardo and Boyd (1999, 2008), BTP is a combination of deep con-
centration on a positively perceived past, moderate concentration on the future, moderate
hedonistic concentration on the present, poor fatalistic concentration on the present, and
poor concentration on a negatively perceived past. Drake et al. (2008) studied the con-
nection between BTP and a subjective sense of happiness and mindfulness. They applied
quartile deviations in order to distinguish a group of individuals (from all respondents)
whose intensity of various temporal scales was consistent with the exemplary profile
proposed by Zimbardo. As expected, the respondents characterised by a BTP were happier
and demonstrated higher mindfulness compared to those with other profiles. Boniwell et al.
(2010) adopted a different approach while investigating relationships between BTP and
well-being; they applied a hierarchical cluster analysis to the five scales of the Zimbardo
Time Perspective Inventory (ZTPI). Four clusters were selected, of which one best
reflected the profile typical for people with a well-balanced TP (moderate concentration on
a positive past and future, slightly lower hedonistic concentration, and poor fatalistic
concentration, in addition to poor concentration on negative past). The respondents from
the BTP group were characterised by greater life satisfaction, less negative affection,
frequent positive affection and stronger self-update. In studies conducted with the use of
the Russian version of the ZTPI, the group of respondents with a profile similar to BTP,
when compared to people from groups of other temporal profiles, was characterised by a
stronger sense of meaning in life, greater life satisfaction, stronger subjectively perceived
well-being, greater optimism and a stronger sense of self-efficacy (Boniwell et al. 2010).
    Stolarski et al. (2011) used yet another method to determine BTP in the respondents;
they calculated a deviation coefficient of a given respondent’s individual profile from an
exemplary BTP (according to Zimbardo and Boyd 2008). The results they obtained showed
that higher emotional intelligence is a predictor of smaller deviations from BTP, which is
due to the fact that coping strategies and self-control of emotions determine BTP devel-
opment. In their studies, the strongest predictor of the tendency to postpone gratification
was the BTP coefficient calculated according to the proposed formula. It was interesting



123
Positive Time: Balanced Time Perspective and Positive…


that none of the separated TP dimensions explained the tendency to postpone gratification.
These results emphasise how important it is to include temporal profiles in studies instead
of only analysing individual dimensions.
   Zhang et al. (2013) compared three methods of measuring BTP, including a cluster
analysis used by Boniwell et al. (2010), quartile deviations applied by Drake et al. (2008),
and deviation of a BTP coefficient (DBTP) calculated on the basis of the formula for the
deviation of an individual profile from exemplary one. The BTP most strongly correlated
with well-being is when it was operationalised as DBTP (Stolarski et al. 2011). According
to these authors, further studies in this area should focus on the relationship between BTP
and other aspects of well-being and also check the influence of changes introduced to a TP
structure on the measurement of BTP. Following these suggestions, in our investigation,
we chose a positive orientation (PO) as an important indicator of well-being, as well as
introducing a new component of BTP: active concentration on the present.

1.5 Positive Orientation

The development of positive psychology has allowed researchers to distinguish a whole
range of phenomena that make up what we understand as well-being. Many of these
phenomena show positive, moderate or high correlations with each other, which may
indicate the presence of a higher-order factor explaining their common variability. While
specific variables, such as self-esteem and optimism, help to further clarify the specific
nature and significance of different areas of performance, a more general factor allows the
explanation of the overriding dimension of well-being, thereby serving as a direct measure
of general well-being. Caprara (2009) suggested that PO is such a factor. Caprara defines
PO as a general tendency to respond to life experiences with a positive attitude (Alessandri
et al. 2012; Caprara 2009; Caprara et al. 2010). From an empirical point of view, PO is a
latent variable that explains the common variability of three variables used most frequently
in studies on optimal functioning: self-esteem (measured with Self-Esteem Scale, SES,
Rosenberg 1965), life satisfaction (Life Satisfaction Scale, SWLS, Diener et al. 1985) and
optimism (Life Orientation Test, LOT-R; Scheier et al. 1994). Based on the overall score, a
factor score is calculated, and that score is a measure of PO.
   The use of PO as a measure of well-being allows the prediction of a significantly greater
percentage of variability of other variables, when compared to models in which variables
are predicted by means of self-esteem, optimism and life satisfaction treated as indepen-
dent variables (Alessandri et al. 2012). Therefore, if well-being as such is the subject of the
analysis, it is preferable to use PO rather than specific variables. In studies verifying the
accuracy of this construct, PO is significantly positively correlated with hedonistic balance,
the quality of interpersonal relationships and perceived health status (Caprara et al. 2010).
Caprara et al. (2010) and Oles et al. (2013) also discovered a connection between PO and a
sense of self-efficacy.


2 Present Study

The primary aim of the research presented in this article is to investigate the relationship
between PO and TP in terms of Zimbardo and Boyd’s work (1999), which is extended to a
third form of the present TP: the active concentration on the present. Based on the studies
presented above, we formulated the following hypotheses.


                                                                                    123
                                                             M. Sobol-Kwapinska, T. Jankowski


Hypothesis 1 PO significantly correlates positively with a temporal profile characterised
by deep concentration on positive past, moderate concentration on the future, moderate
hedonistic concentration, poor fatalistic concentration, poor concentration on negative past,
and deep active concentration on present.
Hypothesis 2 Canonical correlation between sets of variables that represent PO and TP
would be stronger when Carpe Diem is included as additional present TP.
Hypothesis 3 Cluster analysis allows the identification of a cluster corresponding to
BTP, in which active concentration on the present intensity is high.
   The relative importance of active concentration on the present to explain PO through the
use of the BTP operationalisation method proposed by Stolarski et al. (2011, described in
detail below) will also be examined. This method allows intensity specification of various
temporal scales on the basis of theoretical assumptions regarding BTP. It also enables a
calculation for each individual for just one variable that represents the deviation of this
respondent’s profile from the reference profile of BTP. Manipulating the intensity of
particular temporal dimensions allows the development of several alternative coefficients
of BTP, emphasising the different significance of various temporal perspectives: com-
paring models in which alternative temporal profiles are the PO predictor leads to choosing
a profile that best explains PO. This part of the analysis is exploratory in nature.


3 Method

3.1 Participants

The study group consisted of 185 people (121 female; 64 male). The study was conducted
in Poland on a group of 219 people, of whom 185 returned a set of completed question-
naires. The respondents were selected at random. Their ages were between 15 and 82
(M = 37.02, SD = 15.9) and over 50 % of the respondents were more than 35 years old at
the time of the study. Nearly 50 % of the respondents had a degree in economics, 16 % in
medicine and related sciences and 16 % in pedagogy. Almost 70 % of the respondents
lived in a small town or in the country. Most of them received questionnaires directly from
a psychologist or a psychologist’s assistant. The others received questionnaires by mail.

3.2 Measures

3.2.1 Time Perspective

The ZTPI (Zimbardo and Boyd 1999) was used to measure five dimensions of TP. It is a
self-descriptive test which consists of 56 items. It examines attitudes towards time: the
past, the present and the future, and behaviours related to them. The respondent is asked to
indicate how accurately or inaccurately each term describes the object by selecting an
appropriate numerical response category (from 1 = ‘very untrue’ to 5 = ‘very true’). The
questionnaire consists of five scales. The Past-Positive scale (in Polish translation
alpha = .61) examines concentration on a positively evaluated past (for example: ‘It gives
me pleasure to think about my past’). The Negative-Past scale (alpha = .83) refers to
concentration on a negatively perceived past (for example: ‘It’s hard for me to forget
unpleasant images from my youth’). The Present-Hedonistic scale (alpha = .81) measures


123
Positive Time: Balanced Time Perspective and Positive…


hedonistic concentration on the present (for example: ‘I take risks to put excitement in my
life’). The Present-Fatalistic scale (alpha = .72) pertains to fatalistic orientation on the
present (for example: ‘Fate determines much in my life’). The Future scale (alpha = .76)
examines concentration on a positively perceived future (for example: ‘I believe that a
person’s day should be planned ahead each morning’). In our study, we used the Polish
translation of the test (Sobol-Kwapinska et al. 2015) performed by Przepiorka and
authorised by Zimbardo.

3.2.2 Self-Esteem

To measure self-esteem, an SES (Rosenberg 1965) was used and adapted to Polish cir-
cumstances (Dzwonkowska et al. 2008). It consists of 10 items (the Polish version of the
scale alpha = .83). It measures the general level of a sense of one’s self-worth as disclosed
in the self-description and treated as a relatively constant personality trait. The respondent
takes a stance on each of the statements on a four-point scale (from 1 = ‘strongly agree’ to
4 = ‘strongly disagree’). This is a sample item: ‘I feel that I have a number of good
qualities’.

3.2.3 Satisfaction with Life

The SWLS by Diener et al. (1985) was used to measure a sense of satisfaction with life.
The scale consists of five items (the Polish version of the scale alpha = .85; Juczynski
2012). This is a sample item: ‘In most ways, my life is close to my ideal’. The respondent
takes a stance on each of the statements on a seven-point scale (from 7 = ‘strongly agree’
to 1 = ‘strongly disagree’).

3.2.4 Optimism

Optimism was measured using the LOT-R by Scheier et al. (1994). The scale is composed
of 10 items, while 4 of these are fillers and only 6 are relevant for the optimism score (the
Polish version of the scale alpha = .80; Juczynski 2012). It measures expectations
regarding the future and a general sense of optimism. This is a sample item: ‘In uncertain
times, I usually expect the best’. The respondent takes a stance on each of the statements
on a five-point scale (from 4 = ‘strongly agree’ to 0 = ‘strongly disagree’).

3.2.5 Active Present Perspective

The Carpe Diem Scale by Sobol-Kwapinska (2009, 2013) was used to measure active
concentration on the present (alpha = .82). It consists of 10 items, for example: ‘I
appreciate the value of every moment of life’. The respondents are asked to indicate on a
five-point scale the extent to which they agree with the given statements (from
1 = ‘completely disagree’ to 5 = ‘completely agree’). The scale accuracy was determined
by correlations with other measures of temporal attitudes (see Sobol-Kwapinska 2009,
2013). For example, the scale correlated significantly positively with the Telicity scale
from Temporal Orientation Questionnaire AION-2000 by Nosal and Bajcar (2004), which
measures concentration on goal achievement, significantly positively with the Purpose in
Life scale (Crumbaugh and Maholick 1981), and with the Positive Affect scale from the
Positive and Negative Affect Scale (PANAS; Watson et al. 1988). Moreover, the Carpe



                                                                                   123
                                                               M. Sobol-Kwapinska, T. Jankowski


Diem Scale correlated moderately positively with the Present scale, also from the AION-
2000 questionnaire, measuring hedonistic and fatalistic concentration on the present
(Sobol-Kwapinska 2013). High scores on the Carpe Diem Scale also linked with a positive
evaluation of time in general (Sobol-Kwapinska and Nosal 2009).


4 Results

To check relations between PO and TP we performed pairwise correlations as well as
canonical correlation analysis. Next we used cluster analysis to verify the third hypothesis
that active concentration on the present is a significant component of the BTW profile, as it
was defined by Zimbardo and Boyd (1999). Lastly, using Stolarski‘s et al. (2011) formula,
we computed several alternative BTP indexes which differed in intensity of active and
hedonic time perspectives. It allowed us to check which of the theoretically derived BTP
versions predics PO best.
   Table 1 shows descriptive statistics and correlations for variables in the study. The
analysis of sex differences indicated only one variable, namely concentration on the future,
for which men scored significantly lower than women (t = -2.68, p = .008). As far as
other scales are concerned, the results were comparable for both men and women. Age was
positively correlated only with future perspective, but this relation was very weak (r = .15)
what suggests that both neither the level of PO nor TP are age dependent. The correlations
between individual PO components and TP dimensions are, in most cases, significant,
although they range from weak to moderate. Self-esteem and optimism are weakly but
significantly correlated with active concentration on the present (r = .24 and r = .25
respectively; significance for both is p \ .001), while satisfaction with life is not related to
active concentration on the present (r = .11, p ns). The strongest negative relationship with
PO components appeared in the case of negative past (Pearsons‘r equals from -.42 to
-.47, p \ .001), whereas for fatalistic present orientation (Pearsons‘r equals from -.12 to
.06, p ni), there were no relationships at all, consistent for all three components of PO.
Only one.

4.1 Canonical Correlations

The pairwise correlations described above allow researchers only to capture the relation-
ships between individual variables. Our study was designed to determine the extent to
which PO allows the prediction of BTP. One way to answer this question is to use
canonical correlations, which allows a researcher to check whether two groups of variables
forming PO and TP correlate with each other as expected. For this purpose, we designed an
analysis involving two sets of variables: one which included self-esteem, satisfaction with
life and optimism, and another which consisted of the ZTPI individual scales. We also
carried out an additional canonical analysis, which differed from the first only in one more
variable, which we added to the set referring to TP, that is active concentration on the
present.
    For the analysis that did not include the Carpe Diem Scale, we obtained three functions
with canonical correlations amounting to .66, .29 and .07. The first and the second function
were statistically significant, while the third function turned out to be irrelevant. Due to the
small percentage of explained variance by the second function (it amounted to only 8 % of
variance unexplained by the first function), we decided to interpret only the first canonical


123
      Table 1 Descriptive statistics and correlations between variables
      Variable                      (1)             (2)            (3)       (4)       (5)       (6)       (7)     (8)       (9)     (10)

      1. Self-esteem
      2. Satisfaction with life        .47**
      3. Optimism                      .59**          .42**
      4. Past-Positive                 .33**          .32**          .25**
      5. Past-Negative               -.47**         -.42**         -.44**    -.20**
      6. Present-Hedonistic            .01          -.12             .06       .21**     .37**
      7. Present-Fatalistic          -.36**         -.26**         -.53**    -.04        .65**     .43**
                                                                                                                                             Positive Time: Balanced Time Perspective and Positive…




      8. Future                        .25**          .22**          .15*      .23**   -.02        .14     -.02
      9. Carpe Diem                    .24**          .11            .25**     .13     -.07        .26**     .01     .24**
      10. Age                          .10            .10            .06       .04     -.01      -.14      -.04      .15*      .10
      Mean                          19.9            20.7           14.8      32.6      30.8      50.7      27.3    45.1      39.0    37.02
      SD                             4.46            5.86           4.20      4.89      7.86      8.46      6.09    6.45      5.81   15.90

      ** p \ .01; * p \ .05




123
                                                                       M. Sobol-Kwapinska, T. Jankowski


function in a further discussion. For the analysis that takes the Carpe Diem Scale into
account we obtained three functions with canonical correlations amounting to .67, .30 and
.07. This time, only the first function was significant, whereas the others did not reach the
threshold of significance (i.e., p \ .05). Like in the previous analysis, we further interpret
only the first canonical function.
   Table 2 presents the factor loadings and redundancy for the first canonical function. R2c
indicates that both canonical variables share 43 % of their variance (45 % after taking the
Carpe Diem Scale into account). The canonical factor loadings for self-esteem, satisfaction
with life and optimism are similar to those obtained in other studies (e.g., Oles et al. 2013).
This allows the interpretation of this canonical variable as representing PO. The PO latent
variable explains 66 % of the variance shared by self-esteem, satisfaction with life and
optimism. These three variables are also moderately correlated with the second canonical
variable (see cross-loadings for the Set 1 in the Table 1) which explains 29 % of their
common variance.
   The factor loadings for the second set of variables (temporal) indicate that this canonical
variable, which explains 27 % of variance shared by ZTPI scales, mainly reflects low
scores in Past-Negative and Present-Fatalistic, high in Past-Positive and moderate in
Future. What is interesting, Past-Negative and Present-Fatalistic scales are also signifi-
cantly correlated with PO latent variable, as cross-loadings for the Set 2 show. The
structure of the factor loadings reminds us of the structure of BTP as postulated by
Zimbardo et al. (Boniwell and Zimbardo 2004; Zimbardo and Boyd 2008), with the
exception of the score in Present-Hedonistic scale. Present-Hedonistic seems to have no
relevance to the interpretation of the temporal latent variable correlated with PO. The
canonical variable, which is the result of the empirical adjustment of a model to data,
indicates that PO predicts a set of temporal variables that is dominated primarily by low
Past-Negative and Present-Fatalistic. In other words, while BTP stresses the importance of
positive aspects of TP, empirical analysis emphasizes a low intensity of negative dimen-
sions. An important difference between the theory and the results of canonical analysis is
the Present-Hedonistic insignificance for the interpretation of the latter.
   What is important, active concentration on the present proves to be a meaningful
component of the BTP—it is moderately (.38) correlated with BTP latent variable. Model
that includes Carpe Diem Scale as a BTP component explains more variance (R2c = .45)
compared to the model that represents only ZTPI scales (R2c = .43).


Table 2 Factor loadings and
                                                                    Loadings             Cross-loadings
redundancy for the first canonical
function
                                     Set 1: positive orientation variables
                                     Self-esteem                      .90 (.89)            .60 (.59)
                                     Life Satisfaction                .72 (.73)            .48 (.48)
                                     Optimism                         .81 (.80)            .54 (.53)
                                     Set 2: temporal variables
                                     Past-positive                    .55 (.56)            .37 (.37)
                                     Past-negative                  -.82 (.-83)          -.55 (-.55)
                                     Present-hedonistic             -.01 (-.02)          -.01 (-.01)
                                     Present-fatalistic             -.60 (-.61)          -.40 (-.40)
Values displayed in brackets         Future                           .39 (.40)            .26 (.26)
refer to the model not including     Carpe Diem                        .38                  .26
active perspective on the present


123
Positive Time: Balanced Time Perspective and Positive…


4.2 Cluster Analysis

Canonical correlations help trace the extent to which variables related to PO correlate with
TP dimensions. They do not allow, however, for the comparison of people with different
TP profiles in terms of specific variables. To separate respondents with different TP pro-
files, we applied a hierarchical cluster analysis, carried out with the use of Ward’s method
and Euclidean squared distances. Following Zhang et al. (2013), we conducted a cluster
analysis, assuming a division into groups of two, three, four and five possible clusters so as
to avoid a situation in which the criterion for separating the number of clusters will reduce
the chance of finding a group of people with a typical BTP profile. We conducted the
cluster analysis for the set of variables that consisted of the standardised results of the ZTPI
scales increased by the Carpe Diem Scale.
    This cluster analysis allowed the identification of people with BTP, assuming that the
Carpe Diem Scale is considered to be an alternative to Present-Hedonistic concentration on
the present. When three clusters were separated, one of the groups was characterised by
high scores in Past-Positive and Future, low scores in the Past-Negative and Present-
Fatalistic and moderately high intensity on the Carpe Diem Scale. The scores on the
Present-Hedonistic scale in this cluster were around the average. Other clusters were
typical for people with low intensity of most of the TP dimensions (except for Past-
Negative and Present-Fatalistic, which were at average level) and those with very high
scores in the Past-Negative and Present-Fatalistic, high Present-Hedonistic, moderately
high Future and Carpe Diem and low Past-Positive scores. The groups were different in
terms of PO intensity, F (2, 180) = 32.87, p \ .001, ETA2 = .27, and post hoc tests (with
the Bonfferoni correction) demonstrated a significant difference between the BTP group
and the other two clusters (p \ .001), which, in turn, did not differ significantly from each
other (p = .34).

4.3 BTP Theoretical Operationalisation

Both canonical and cluster analysis are exploratory statistical methods and we applied
them here to determine which set of variables representing different TP profiles would be
fully predicted by PO. The analyses we carried out indicated Present-Hedonistic to be the
scale which is not significantly correlated with optimal functioning as measured by PO.
They pointed, however, to Carpe Diem as a variable significantly correlated with well-
being. In addition to these methods of data analysis, it is possible to operationalise BTP
based on theoretical assumptions. There are two attempts of this kind in the literature: (1)
separating people with a temporal profile corresponding to the reference profile and
comparing their level of functioning, and (2) formulating a numerical coefficient to
measure the deviation of a given person’s profile from the reference profile and correlating
it with measures of well-being. The first of these approaches, proposed by Drake et al.
(2008), raises many problems, both from statistical and interpretative points of view. The
separated groups are usually not large enough and constitute about 5 % of the study
sample. In addition, the criteria for separating individuals are also more dependent on the
description of a given sample (the cut-off point = the 33rd percentile in a given scale)
rather than reflecting theoretical assumptions.
   The second method of theoretical operationalisation of BTP, proposed by Stolarski et al.
(2011), allows researchers to obtain the direct BTP coefficient calculated on the basis of
theoretical assumptions. Studies conducted by Zhang et al. (2013) showed that BTP



                                                                                    123
                                                                                                                M. Sobol-Kwapinska, T. Jankowski


correlates most with the well-being measures when it is operationalised as DBTP. For the
calculation of the DBTP coefficient, the following formula is used:
    DBTP1
       qﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ
     ¼ ðoPN  ePNÞ2 þ ðoPP  ePPÞ2 þ ðoPF  ePFÞ2 þ ðoPH  ePHÞ2 þ ðoFU  eFUÞ2

where oPN—ePN is the difference between optimal intensity of the Past-Negative scale for
BTP (according to Zimbardo’s concept) and the empirical score on this scale obtained from
a given participant. Further segments of the equation correspond to successive ZTPI scales.
In the present study, we created five alternative coefficients that include both ZTPI scales
and the score on the Carpe Diem Scale or omit the Present-Hedonistic scale in the
equation, replacing it with the Carpe Diem Scale. Following Stolarski et al. (2011) who, in
turn, referred to Zimbardo and Boyd’s proposals (cf. www.thetimeparadox.com/surveys),
the following intensity of individual scales (optimal of BTP) were adopted: high Past-
Positive (4.60); moderately high Present-Hedonistic (3.90); moderately high Future (4.00);
low Past-Negative (1.95), and low Present-Fatalistic (1.50). In addition, we decided that
the Carpe Diem Scale intensity should be, as in the case of Present-Hedonistic, 3.90 or
higher, that is 4.60, as in the case of Past-Positive. The formula expresses the deviation of
the optimal profile from the profile obtained by the respondent: the higher the DBTP
coefficient, the further from the optimal TP it is for a single person. A zero score in DBTP
indicates perfectly balanced temporal perspective, according to the criteria.
   In order to verify the hypothesis, according to which active concentration on the present
is a better BTP indicator than Present-Hedonistic, three regression analyses were con-
ducted, in which PO was the variable criterion, while consecutive DBTP coefficients with
indices from one to three were the predictors. Such a solution was chosen not because of
theoretical assumptions that suggest rather a reverse path direction, but for practical rea-
sons, to compare the models with the same dependent variable to each other. It was
assumed that DBTP1 reflects the BTP coefficient calculated only for five ZTPI scales;
DBTP2 includes all ZTPI scales together with the Carpe Diem Scale (high intensity in the
profile—4.60), and DBTP3 includes all ZTPI scales together with the Carpe Diem Scale
(moderately high intensity in the profile—3.90).
   The PO index was created by means of a factor analysis conducted for the summary
scores of the SES, SWLS and LOT-R. Both the Kaiser criterion and the scree plot pointed
to one important factor explaining 66 % of the common variability of the above-mentioned
variables. The factor loading for self-esteem was the highest (.85), was slightly lower for
optimism (.83), and was the lowest for satisfaction with life (.76), although still very high.
   Table 3 shows the results of the three regression models1 in which the DBTP alternative
coefficients were the PO predictors. In order to select the model that best explains the
variables set, the Akaike information criterion (AIC) was used. According to the AIC, the
model which includes the DBTP2 coefficient, that is, the model including both moderate
hedonistic concentration intensity and high active concentration on the present intensity
turns out to be the least deviated from the real model compared to the other models. The
rest of the AIC coefficients differ from the AIC coefficient for DBTP2 model by more than
ten. Such a difference (although all models are adjusted to data) allows the rejection
thereof, as models were significantly worse at explaining data: based on AIC weights, it is

1
  The age was not included in the models as a covariant because it was not correlated either with positive
orientation factor (r = .10, p ns) or any version of DBTP index (r equals from -.08 to -.03, p ns).


123
Positive Time: Balanced Time Perspective and Positive…


Table 3 Comparison of five regression models with optimal-empirical temporal profiles discrepancy as a
predictor of positive orientation
Predictor   F(1,181)     B         SE     Beta     t           R2     AIC       DAIC      AIC weight

DBTP1       106.38        -.80     .08    -.61     -10.31      .37    439.72    12.09       .002
DBTP2       126.01        -.87     .08    -.64     -11.22      .41    427.63       .00      .997
DBTP3         89.44      -1.02     .11    -.58         -9.46   .33    450.84    23.21     \.001




possible to determine a probability of 99.7 % that the second model is the best, despite the
sample (Burnham and Anderson 2002). The model in which BTP takes into account high
intensity of active concentration on the present explains 41 % of the PO variation, which
proves large effect size.
   In conclusion, the data analysis confirms significant correlations between PO and the set
of temporal variables postulated by Zimbardo (Boniwell and Zimbardo 2004; Zimbardo
and Boyd 1999, 2008). An important difference is the minor significance of hedonistic
concentration on the present (Present-Hedonistic) in explaining PO and major significance
of active concentration on the present.


5 Discussion

This study was aimed at verifying hypotheses about the relationships between TP
according to Zimbardo and Boyd (1999, 2008) and PO according to Caprara (2009). We
postulated that PO correlates with BTP, i.e., with deep concentration on a positively
evaluated past, moderately deep concentration on the future, moderately deep hedonistic
concentration on the present, poor fatalistic concentration on the present, and poor con-
centration on a negatively assessed past. We also introduced an additional kind of con-
centration on the present, namely an active Carpe Diem concentration (Sobol-Kwapinska
2009, 2013), which, according to the hypothesis, was to fit the frames of the BTP profile
and positively correlate with PO. In order to verify the above postulates, we used the Polish
version of the ZTPI, increased by the Carpe Diem Scale.
   The results we obtained partially confirm the postulated relationship between PO and
BTP. Frequent concentration on a positively perceived past combined with moderately
deep concentration on the future, poor fatalistic concentration and poor concentration on a
negatively assessed past, is strongly and positively correlated with PO. Only the hedonistic
concentration on the present (Present-Hedonistic) was neither included in the set of tem-
poral variables related to PO, nor was significantly intensified in the cluster characterised
by a set of scales resembling BTP. Our results, aside from the Present-Hedonistic scale,
largely support the BTP theory proposed by Zimbardo and Boyd (2008). Drake et al.
(2008) discovered that hedonistic concentration on the present correlated negatively with
subjective well-being. The results of a study published recently by Sircova et al. (2015),
have shown that the BTP profiled and identified in a multicultural sample by cluster
analysis includes a moderately low level of hedonistic perspective. In studies conducted by
Wiberg et al. (2012), it was an average, not moderately high, Present-Hedonistic score that
made up the balanced TP profile. On the other side, in studies undertaken by Boniwell et al.
(2010) and by Zhang et al. (2013) Present-Hedonistic positively correlated with the well-
being measures. The ambiguity of the results regarding the Present-Hedonistic scale


                                                                                          123
                                                               M. Sobol-Kwapinska, T. Jankowski


significance for the BTP profile can be explained by the considerable instability of cor-
relation between this scale and various indicators of well-being. In other words, the
strength and direction of a possibly weak relationship may be seriously affected by the
selection of respondents to join the research sample. In our case, the unique nature of
Polish culture may have additional meaning. Perhaps the way the Polish people understand
and express hedonistic perspective is different to that of Western cultures, for instance,
Americans. The results of studies conducted by Sobol-Kwapinska (2014) confirm this
assumption, as they suggest that hedonistic concentration on the present verified with the
use of the Polish version of the ZTPI is a many-sided variable. For example, a tendency to
carry out risky behaviours, which in the original version of the ZTPI belongs to Present-
Hedonistic, in Polish version correlated more with the fatalistic perspective rather than
with Present-Hedonistic. This suggests an interesting interpretation that Americans take
risks mainly for pleasure, while Polish people do so because of a conviction that they
cannot affect reality. Similarly, the energy and activity which, in the original version,
belonged to the Present-Hedonistic scale, correlated more with concentration on the future
in the Polish version. On this basis, we may speculate that perhaps the hedonism of Polish
people might have fewer positive connotations when compared to Americans. Perhaps the
Polish people give themselves permission to enjoy life less often than Americans. This
would be a very interesting issue to explore in future studies. Cultural factors appear to be
vitally important in explaining the variance of results obtained in different countries,
especially if we pay attention to the fact that Drake et al. (2008) conducted their studies
among the Scots, Boniwell et al. (2010) described the findings regarding Britons and
Russians, Wiberg et al. (2012) studied the Swedes, while Zhang et al. (2013) focused their
academic interests on Americans. Moreover, in the studies conducted by Boniwell et al.
(2010) positive correlation between hedonism (Present-Hedonistic) and SWB measures
was much weaker in the group of Russians than in the group of Britons.
   Active concentration on the present significantly explained BTP, which confirms our
hypothesis. In the canonical analysis, the Carpe Diem Scale was of moderate importance
for the interpretation of the set of variables that affects PO the most. Similarly, the cluster
analysis allowed for the separation of a group of individuals having a profile corresponding
to the BTP, where active concentration on the present intensity was, in contrast to hedo-
nistic concentration, moderately high. Calculating the DBTP coefficients reflecting the
average deviation of a given person’s profile from the reference profiles allowed us to
clarify the role that these two types of concentration on the present play in explaining PO.
Comparing different models suggests that the profile best explaining PO contains both the
Present-Hedonistic scale of moderately high intensity and the Carpe Diem Scale of high
intensity, equal to the Past-Positive intensity.
   An important novelty in this study is the highlighting of active concentration on the
present as a temporal perspective important to well-being. Our results suggest the cor-
rectness of expanding BTP by an additional dimension, namely active concentration on the
present. This is in line with postulates of many theories, in which the importance of balance
between the quest for pleasure and comfort, the development of one’s own abilities and
achievement of important goals is stressed (e.g., Ryan and Deci 2001).
   Our results support the main idea behind the formulation of the BTP concept. According to
this idea, high intensity of Past-Positive and Future and low intensity of Past-Negative and
Present-Fatalistic favours a flexible adaptation to different conditions of life and effective
performance of tasks (Boniwell and Zimbardo 2004). Thanks to flexibility, people are able to
change their attitudes towards time depending on the requirements of a given situation. In
other words, when, for example, people spend time with friends, they concentrate on common

123
Positive Time: Balanced Time Perspective and Positive…


history; when they rest, they focus on the present, free from a feeling of guilt that they are not
working; when they work, they work with a view to future consequences of their present
behaviours and draw from past experiences (Boniwell and Zimbardo 2004; Zimbardo and
Boyd 1999, 2008). Therefore, BTP allows people to freely go on mental travels in time, one of
the basic human adaptabilities. Balanced temporal perspective, expanded by active con-
centration on the present, allows people to both ‘travel in time’ and also to anchor to present
reality. For example, in order for work to give satisfaction and pleasure, active concentration
on the present is necessary; such concentration allows people to experience mental state of the
flow, in which a person performing some activity is fully immersed in this activity (cf. Sobol-
Kwapinska 2009, 2013). Active concentration on the present is also important in crisis
situations. The results of studies conducted by Epel et al. (1999) among homeless people
show that concentration on the present is an optimal attitude towards time in a situation of
dealing with a problem (acute crisis). While concentration on the future correlates with a
greater sense of self-efficacy and optimism, concentration on the present may facilitate
openness to seeking quick solutions to current problems.
    With regard to the limitations of our studies, it is important to stress that, due to the fact that
the studies are correlative in nature, it is difficult to interpret the relationships we discovered
in terms of cause and effect. In addition, we did not consider the past of individual respondents
(for example, the possible presence of significant negative experiences). Arguably, events
from the past may affect the scores obtained in the ZTPI, as suggested by Drake et al. (2008).
In subsequent studies, taking into consideration such events as possible co-variants and
checking BTP adaptive significance not in everyday life, but also in specific life situations,
such as illness, suffering pain, grief, etc., would be worthwhile. The impact of cultural factors
on the TP structure would be a highly important issue to explore in further studies as well. It
would be also interesting to conduct an investigation into subgroups separated by age of the
subjects. Differences in the relationship can be expected between PO and TP, depending on
the age of the respondents (see Carstensen et al. 1999).
    Regarding another limitation of this study it is also worth noting that a focus on the
negatively evaluated future has not been studied. Carelli et al. (2011) emphasised the need
to consider this kind of TP in research.The use of the scale proposed by them might be
fruitful in the future research.
    The results of our studies may have practical applications. An insight into what thoughts
and feelings a patient has about the past, the present and the future may be a good starting
point in therapy. A TP that is too narrow and rigid (i.e., unbalanced) may turn out to be the
source of a patient’s problems. Using the knowledge resulting from the studies on BTP in
therapeutic work with depressive patients may be particularly useful because PO is consid-
ered to be the opposite of depressive cognitive triad. People suffering from depression are
usually concentrating on negative past and fatalistic present and transfer this approach to the
future. A therapy programme should therefore be based on teaching such persons how to deal
with negative experiences by discovering positive aspects hidden in them, concentrating on
the ‘here and now’ and planning a positive future (cf. Zimbardo et al. 2012).


6 Summary

In our study, we investigated the relationship between PO and TP as outlined by Zimbardo
and Boyd (1999) and extended by the Carpe Diem Scale. We took on such studies to check
whether the theoretical concept of BTP according to Zimbardo and Boyd (2008), referred


                                                                                           123
                                                                        M. Sobol-Kwapinska, T. Jankowski


to as a generally positive, optimal attitude towards time, would indeed strongly correlate
with an overall positive attitude towards life. The results we obtained allow us to formulate
an affirmative and convincing answer to this question and may provide a starting point to
design strategies to help people improve their level of functioning. When working on a
more balanced TP, it is possible to improve the functioning of an individual, regardless of
the intensity of this person’s general innate tendency to make positive evaluations
regarding themselves, life and the future.
   Moreover, we justified in our studies the value of expanding the five dimension TP
proposed by Zimbardo to include active concentration on the present in order to capture the
present perspective in a more holistic way. Furthermore, we conducted our studies among
adults who are not students. This is important in as much as the vast majority of temporal
studies have been conducted with the participation of students. Meanwhile Ryack (2012),
like many other researchers, draws attention to the fact that TP dimensions depend on the
group on which such studies are conducted.

Conflict of interest The authors declare there are no potential conflicts of interest with respect to the
research, authorship, and/or publication of this article. The authors disclosed receipt of the following
financial support for the research, authorship, and/or publication of this article: preparation of this manu-
script was supported by the grant ‘Positive orientation—structure and functions’ 1/6-3-8-27 and the grant
‘Time perspective, postoperative pain perception and coping strategies in pain’ 2013/09/B/HS6/02785 from
the National Science Centre.

Open Access This article is distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution 4.0 Inter-
national License (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/), which permits unrestricted use, distribution,
and reproduction in any medium, provided you give appropriate credit to the original author(s) and the
source, provide a link to the Creative Commons license, and indicate if changes were made.




References
Alessandri, G., Caprara, G. V., & Tisak, J. (2012). The unique contribution of positive orientation to optimal
     functioning: Farther explorations. European Psychologists, 17, 44–54.
Barber, L. K., Munz, D. C., Bagsby, P. G., & Grawitch, M. J. (2009). When does time perspective matter?
     Self-control as a moderator between time perspective and academic achievement. Personality and
     Individual Differences, 46, 250–253.
Boniwell, I., Osin, E., Linley, P., & Ivanchenko, G. (2010). A question of balance: Examining relationships
     between time perspective and measures of well-being in the British and Russian samples. Journal of
     Positive Psychology, 5, 24–40.
Boniwell, I., & Zimbardo, P. (2004). Balancing time perspective in pursuit of optimal functioning. In P.
     A. Linley & S. Joseph (Eds.), Positive psychology in practice (pp. 165–178). Hoboken, NJ: Wiley.
Boyd, J. N., & Zimbardo, P. G. (2005). Time perspective, health and risk taking. In A. Strathman & J.
     Joireman (Eds.), Understanding behavior in the context of time (pp. 85–107). London: Lawrence E.
Bryant, F. B., Smart, C. M., & King, S. (2005). Using the past to enhance the present: Boosting happiness
     through positive reminiscence. Journal of Happiness Studies, 6, 227–260.
Burnham, K. P., & Anderson, D. R. (2002). Model selection and multimodel inference. New York, NY:
     Springer.
Caprara, G. V. (2009). Positive orientation: Turning potentials into optimal functioning. The Bulletin of the
     European Health Psychologist, 11, 46–48.
Caprara, G. V., Alessandri, G., & Barbaranelli, C. (2010a). Optimal functioning: The contribution of self-
     efficacy beliefs to positive orientation. Psychotherapy and Psychosomatics, 79, 328–333.
Caprara, G. V., Steca, P., Alessandri, G., Abela, J. R., & McWhinnie, C. D. (2010b). Positive orientation:
     Exploration on what is common to life satisfaction, self-esteem, and optimism. Epidemiology and
     Psychiatric Sciences, 19, 63–71.
Carelli, M., Wiberg, B., & Wiberg, M. (2011). Development and construct validation of the Swedish
     Zimbardo Time Perspective Inventory. European Journal of Psychological Assessment, 27, 220–227.


123
Positive Time: Balanced Time Perspective and Positive…


Carstensen, L. L., Isaacowith, D. M., & Charles, S. T. (1999). Taking time seriously: A theory of socioe-
     motional selectivity. American Psychologist, 54(3), 165–181.
Crumbaugh, J. C., & Maholick, L. T. (1981). Manual of instructions for purpose-in-life test. Murfreesboro,
     TN: Psychometric Affiliates.
D’Alessio, M., Guarino, A., de Pascalis, V., & Zimbardo, P. G. (2003). Testing Zimbardo’s Stanford Time
     Perspective Inventory-Short Form: An Italian study. Time & Society, 12, 333–347.
Daugherty, J. R., & Brase, G. L. (2010). Taking time to be healthy: Predicting health behaviors with delay
     discounting and time perspective. Personality and Individual Differences, 48, 202–207.
Diener, E., Emmons, R., Larsen, J., & Griffin, S. (1985). The satisfaction with life scale. Journal of
     Personality Assessment, 49, 71–75.
Drake, L., Duncan, E., Sutherland, F., Abernethy, C., & Henry, C. (2008). Time perspective and correlates
     of well-being. Time and Society, 17, 47–61.
Dzwonkowska, I., Lachowicz-Tabaczek, K., & Laguna, M. (2008). Samoocena i jej pomiar Skala samoo-
     ceny SES M. Rosenberga [Self-esteem and its measure]. Warszawa: Pracownia Testow Psycholog-
     icznych PTP.
Epel, E. S., Bandura, A., & Zimbardo, P. G. (1999). Escaping homelessness: The influences of self-efficacy
     and time perspective on coping with homelessness. Journal of Applied Social Psychology, 29,
     575–596.
Juczynski, Z. (2012). Narze˛dzia pomiaru w promocji i psychologii zdrowia [Measuring tool in the pro-
     motion and health psychology]. Warszawa: Pracownia Testów Psychologicznych PTP.
Keough, K. A., Zimbardo, P. G., & Boyd, J. N. (1999). Who’s smoking, drinking, and using drugs? Time
     perspective as a predictor of substance use. Journal of Basic and Applied Social Psychology, 21,
     149–164.
Klingemann, H. (2001). The time game: Temporal perspectives of patients and staff in alcohol and drug
     treatment. Time & Society, 10, 303–328.
Lennings, C. J., Burns, A. M., & Cooney, G. (1998). Profiles of time perspective and personality: Devel-
     opmental considerations. The Journal of Psychology, 182, 629–641.
Lyubomirsky, S., & Nolens-Hoeksema, S. (1995). Effects of self-focused rumination on negative thinking
     and interpersonal problem solving. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 69, 176.
Nolen-Hoeksema, S., & Morrow, J. (1993). Effects of rumination and distraction on naturally occurring
     depressed mood. Cognition and Emotion, 7, 561–570.
Nosal, C. S., & Bajcar, B. (2004). Czas psychologiczny: wymiary, struktura, konsekwencje [Psycho-
     logical time: dimensions, structure, consequences]. Warszawa: Wydawnictwo Instytutu Psychologii
     PAN.
Nuttin, J., & Lens, W. (1985). Future time perspective and motivation: Theory and research method.
     Leuven: Leuven University Press.
Oles, P. K., Alessandri, G., Oles, M., Bak, W., Jankowski, T., Laguna, M., & Caprara, G. V. (2013). Positive
     orientation and generalized self-efficacy. Studia Psychologica, 55(1), 47–59.
Rosenberg, M. (1965). Society and the adolescent self-image. Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press.
Rothspan, S., & Read, S. J. (1996). Present versus future time perspective and HIV risk among heterosexual
     college students. Health Psychology, 15, 131–134.
Ryack, K. (2012). Evidence that time perspective factors depend on the group: Factor analyses of the CFC
     and ZTPI scales with professional financial advisors. Personality and Individual Differences, 52,
     723–727.
Ryan, R. M., & Deci, E. D. (2001). On happiness and human potentials: A review of research on hedonic
     and eudaimonic well-being. Annual Review of Psychology, 52, 141–166.
Scheier, M. F., Carver, C. S., & Bridges, M. W. (1994). Distinguishing optimism from neuroticism (and trait
     anxiety, self-mastery, and self-esteem): A reevaluation of the Life Orientation Test. Journal of Per-
     sonality and Social Psychology, 67, 1063–1078.
Shostrom, E. L. (1974). Manual for the personal orientation inventory. San Diego, CA: Educational and
     Industrial Testing Service.
Sircova, A., Van de Vijver, F. J. R., Osin, E., Milfont, T. L., Fieulaine, N., Kislali-Erginbilgic, A., et al.
     (2015). Time perspective profiles and cultures. In M. Stolarski, N. Fieulaine, & W. van Beek (Eds.),
     Time perspective theory; review, research and application; essays in honor of Philip G. Zimbardo (pp.
     169–187). Switzerland: Springer.
Sobol-Kwapinska, M. (2009). Forms of present time orientation and satisfaction with life in the context of
     attitudes toward past and future. Social Behavior and Personality, 37, 433–444.
Sobol-Kwapinska, M. (2013). Hedonism, fatalism and ‘‘Carpe Diem’’: Profiles of attitudes towards the
     present time. Time & Society, 22(3), 371–390.




                                                                                                 123
                                                                        M. Sobol-Kwapinska, T. Jankowski


Sobol-Kwapinska, M. (2014). Carpe Diem, Zimbardo time perspective and positive orientation. Paper
     presented at the 2nd international conference on time perspective, Warszawa.
Sobol-Kwapinska, M., & Nosal, C. S. (2009). How does one conceive time? Measurement by means of
     Time Metaphors Questionnaire. Polish Psychological Bulletin, 40, 1–7.
Sobol-Kwapinska, M., Przepiorka, A., & Zimbardo, P. G. (2015). Structure of time perspective in Poland:
     Validation and extension of the Zimbardo Time Perspective Inventory across the ages. European
     Journal of Psychological Assessment (in review).
Stolarski, M., Bitner, J., & Zimbardo, P. G. (2011). Time perspective, emotional intelligence and dis-
     counting of delayed awards. Time & Society, 20(3), 346–363.
Strathman, A., Gleicher, F., Boninger, D. S., & Edwards, C. S. (1994). The consideration of future con-
     sequences: Weighing immediate and distant outcomes of behavior. Journal of Personality and Social
     Psychology, 66, 742–752.
Watson, D., Clark, A., & Tellegen, A. (1988). Development and validation of brief measures of positive and
     negative affect: The PANAS Scales. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 54(6), 1063–1070.
Wiberg, M., Sircova, A., Wiberg, B., & Carelli, M. G. (2012). Operationalizing balanced time perspective in
     a Swedish sample. The International Journal of Educational and Psychological Assessment, 12(1),
     95–107.
Wills, T. A., Sandy, J. M., Yaeger, A. M., Cleary, S. D., & Shinar, O. (2001). Coping dimensions, life stress,
     and adolescent substance use: A latent growth analysis. Journal of Abnormal Psychology, 110,
     309–323.
Zaleski, Z., Cycon, A., & Kurc, A. (2001). Future time perspective and subjective well-being in adolescent
     samples. In P. Schmuck & K. M. Sheldon (Eds.), Life goals and well-being: Towards a positive
     psychology of human striving (pp. 68–95). Ashland: Hogrefe & Huber.
Zhang, J. W., Howell, R. T., & Stolarski, M. (2013). Comparing three methods to measure a balanced time
     perspective: The relationship between a balanced time perspective and a subjective well-being. Journal
     of Happiness Studies, 14, 169–184.
Zimbardo, P. G., & Boyd, J. N. (1999). Putting time in perspective: A valid reliable individual differences
     metric. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 77, 1271–1288.
Zimbardo, P. G., & Boyd, J. N. (2008). The time paradox: The new psychology of time that will change your
     life. New York, NY: The Free Press.
Zimbardo, P. G., Keough, K. A., & Boyd, J. N. (1997). Present time perspective as a predictor of risky
     driving. Personality and Individual Differences, 23(6), 1007–1023.
Zimbardo, P. G., Sword, R. M., & Sword, R. K. (2012). The time cure: Overcoming PTSD with the new
     psychology of time perspective therapy. San Francisco, CA: Jossey-Bass.




123
