Journal of Educational Psychology
1997, Vol. 89, No. 2, 342-357

Copyright 1997 by the American Psychological Association. Inc.
0022-066 3/97/$3.Ofl

Reasoning Independently of Prior Belief and Individual Differences in
Actively Open-Minded Thinking

This document is copyrighted by the American Psychological Association or one of its allied publishers.
This article is intended solely for the personal use of the individual user and is not to be disseminated broadly.

Keith E. Stanovich
University of Toronto

Richard F. West
James Madison University

A sample of 349 college students completed an argument evaluation test (AET) in which they
evaluated arguments concerning real-life situations. A separate regression analysis was
conducted for each student predicting his or her evaluations of argument quality from an
objective indicator of argument quality and the strength of his or her prior beliefs about the
target propositions. The beta weight for objective argument quality was interpreted in this
analysis as an indicator of the ability to evaluate objective argument quality independent of
prior belief. Individual differences in this index were reliably linked to individual differences
in cognitive ability and actively open-minded thinking dispositions. Further, actively openminded thinking predicted variance in AET performance even after individual differences in
cognitive ability had been partialled out.

Discussions of critical thinking in the educational and
psychological literature consistently point to the importance
of decontextualized reasoning styles that foster the tendency
to evaluate arguments and evidence in a way that is not
contaminated by one's prior beliefs. The disposition toward
such unbiased reasoning is almost universally viewed as a
characteristic of good critical thought. For example, Norris
and Ennis (1989) listed as one characteristic of critical
thinkers the disposition to "reason from starting points with
which they disagree without letting the disagreement interfere with their reasoning" (p. 12). Zechmeister and Johnson
(1992) listed as one characteristic of the critical thinker the
ability to "accept statements as true even when they don't
agree with one's own position" (p. 6). Similarly, Nickerson
(1987) and many other theorists (e.g., Brookfleld, 1987;
Lipman, 1991; Perkins, 1995; Perkins, Jay, & Tishman,
1993; Wade & Tavris, 1993) stressed that critical thinking
entails the ability to recognize "the fallibility of one's own
opinions, the probability of bias in those opinions, and the
danger of differentially weighting evidence according to
personal preferences" (Nickerson, 1987, p. 30). The grow-

ing literature on informal or practical reasoning likewise
emphasizes the importance of detaching one's own beliefs
from the process of argument evaluation (Baron, 1991, 1995;
Brenner, Koehler, & Tversky, 19%; Galotti, 1989; Kardash &
Scholes, 1996; Klaczynski, 1997; Klaczynski & Gordon, 1996;
Kuhn, 1991, 1993; Voss, Perkins, & Segal, 1991).
The emphasis on avoiding the effects of belief bias in the
critical thinking literature is well motivated by the theoretical prominence accorded the concept of cognitive decontextualization within psychology (e.g., Donaldson, 1978,
1993; Epstein, 1994; Evans, 1984, 1989; Luria, 1976; Neimark, 1987; Olson, 1977, 1986, 1994; Piaget, 1926, 1972).
An important research tradition within cognitive science has
examined the influence of prior beliefs on argument evaluation and has demonstrated how prior belief does bias
human reasoning (Baron, 1995; Broniarczyk & Alba, 1994;
Evans, Over, & Manktelow, 1993; Markovits & Nantel,
1989; OakhiU, Johnson-Laird, & Garnham, 1989). Although
investigators have observed group trends indicating beliefbias effects in the literatures of both social psychology (e.g.,
Lord, Lepper, & Preston, 1984) and cognitive psychology
(Evans, Barston, & Pollard, 1983; Oakhill et al., 1989), only
recently have they turned their attention to individual differences in these effects (see Kardash & Scholes, 1996;
Klaczynski, 1997; Kuhn, 1991, 1993; Slusher & Anderson,
1996).
The relative lack of work on individual differences in
reasoning in the presence of prior belief has had negative
practical and theoretical consequences. On the practical
side, little progress has been made in assessing this foundational aspect of critical thinking. As mentioned previously, reasoning objectively about data and arguments that
contradict prior beliefs is often seen as the quintessence of
critical thought. It is thus essential that one has experimental
methods that can identify individual differences in this
crucial component of rational thought and that can relate
these differences to other cognitive and personality vari-

Keith E. Stanovich, Department of Human Development and
Applied Psychology, University of Toronto, Toronto, Ontario,
Canada; Richard F. West, Department of Psychology, James Madison University.
This research was supported by Grant 410-95-0315 from the
Social Sciences and Humanities Research Council of Canada and
a James Madison University Program Faculty Assistance grant.
We thank Penny Chiappe, Alexandra Gottardo, Walter Sa, and
Ron Stringer for their assistance in data coding. Anne E. Cunningham is thanked for her help in obtaining the experts' evaluations.
We also thank Carole Beal for her extensive comments on earlier
versions of this article.
Correspondence concerning this article should be addressed to
Keith E. Stanovich, Department of Human Development and Applied Psychology, Ontario Institute for Studies in Education, University of Toronto, 252 Bloor Street West, ToronLo, Ontario,
Canada M5S 1V6.
342

This document is copyrighted by the American Psychological Association or one of its allied publishers.
This article is intended solely for the personal use of the individual user and is not to be disseminated broadly.

REASONING AND PRIOR BELIEF

ables. Only then will researchers know if the idea of assessing such a component of thought is even feasible. For
example, many standardized critical thinking tests finesse
the issue with neutral content (e.g., Level X of the Cornell
Critical Thinking Test, Ennis & Millman, 1985). Other tests
have controversial content but do not actually measure the
prior belief about the content; instead they try to counterbalance prior belief so that it balances out across individuals
(e.g., Watson-Glaser Critical Thinking Appraisal, Watson
& Glaser, 1980).
The relative lack of data on individual differences in
reasoning in the presence of prior belief also may have
hindered efforts to evaluate the normative status (see Baron,
1985; Bell, Raiffa, & Tversky, 1988) of this thinking skill.
Although, as previously mentioned, the critical thinking
literature emphasizes the ability to separate prior belief from
argument evaluation, there are alternative traditions in developmental and cognitive psychology from which maximizing the decontextualization of the evaluation process
might not be viewed as optimal. For example, the contextualist tradition within developmental psychology emphasizes that the optimum exercise of cognitive skills often
occurs in highly contextualized situations (Bronfenbrenner
& Ceci, 1994; Brown, Collins, & Duguid, 1989; Ceci, 1990,
1993; Lave & Wenger, 1991; Rogoff & Lave, 1984). This
framework might lead one to question whether detaching
prior belief from evidence evaluation really would be the
strategy of the most cognitively able participants.
Several philosophical analyses have also questioned the
normative status of the stricture that evidence evaluation not
be contaminated by prior belief. Kornblith (1993; see also,
Koehler, 1993) argued that
mistaken beliefs will, as a result of belief perseverance, taint
our perception of new data. By the same token, however,
belief perseverance will serve to color our perception of new
data when our preexisting beliefs are accurate
If, overall,
our belief-generating mechanisms give us a fairly accurate
picture of the world, then the phenomenon of belief perseverance may do more to inform our understanding than it does to
distort it (p. 105).

Evans, Over, and Manktelow (1993) provided a similar
account of belief bias in syllogistic reasoning. They considered the status of selective scrutiny explanations of the
belief-bias phenomenon. Such theories posit that participants accept conclusions that are believable without engaging in logical reasoning at all. Only when faced with unbelievable conclusions do participants engage in logical
reasoning about the premises. Evans et al. (1993) considered whether such a processing strategy could be rational in
the sense of serving to achieve the person's goals, and they
concluded that it could. They argued that any adult is likely
to hold a large number of true beliefs that are interconnected
in complex ways. Because single-belief revision has interactive effects on the rest of the belief network, it may be
computationally costly (see Cherniak, 1986; Harman, 1986,
1995). Evans et al. (1993) argued that under such conditions
it is quite right that conclusions that contradict one's beliefs
"should be subjected to the closest possible scrutiny and
refuted if at all possible" (p. 174).

343

Accounts of belief bias such as those of Kornblith (1993)
and Evans et al. (1993) are in the tradition of optimization
models (Schoemaker, 1991) that emphasize the adaptiveness of human cognition (Anderson, 1990, 1991; Campbell,
1987; Cosmides & Tooby, 1994, 1996; Friedrich, 1993;
Oaksford & Chater, 1993, 1994, 1995). For example,
Anderson (1990, 1991)—building on the work of Marr
(1982), Newell (1982), and Pylyshyn (1984)—defined four
levels of theorizing in cognitive science: a biological level
that is inaccessible to cognitive theorizing, an implementation level designed to approximate the biological, an algorithmic level (an abstract specification of the steps necessary to carry out a process), and the rational level. The last
level provides a specification of the goals of the system's
computations (what the system is attempting to compute
and why) and can be used to suggest constraints on the
operation of the algorithmic level. According to Anderson
(1990), the rational level specifies what are the "constraints
on the behavior of the system in order for that behavior to
be optimal" (p. 22). The description of this level of analysis
proceeds from a "general principle of rationality" that assumes that "the cognitive system operates at all times to
optimize the adaptation of the behavior of the organism"
(Anderson, 1990, p. 28). Thus, the rational level of analysis
concerns the goals of the system, the beliefs relevant to
those goals, and the choice of action that is rational given
the system's goals and beliefs (Anderson, 1990; Bratman,
Israel, & Pollack, 1991; Dennett, 1987; Newell, 1982,
1990).
However, even if humans are optimally adapted to their
environments at the rational level of analysis, there may still
be computational limitations at the algorithmic level that
prevent the full realization of the optimal model (e.g., Cherniak, 1986; Goldman, 1978; Oaksford & Chater, 1993,
1995). Assuming that the rational model for all humans in a
given environment is the same, one would still expect
individual differences in actual performance (despite no
rational-level differences) due to differences at the algorithmic level. The responses of organisms with fewer algorithmic limitations would be assumed to be closer to the response that a rational analysis would reveal as optimal.
Thus, the direction of the correlation between response type
and cognitive capacity provides an empirical clue about the
nature of the optimizing response. Specifically, if the standard position in the critical thinking literature is correct,
then people with greater algorithmic capacity should show
an enhanced ability to reason independently of prior belief.
In contrast, if the critiques of the emphasis on decontextualization are correct, then this association should be
attenuated.

Cognitive Capacity and Thinking Dispositions
The distinction between the algorithmic and rational levels of analysis made by computational theorists is similar to
the distinction between cognitive capacity and thinking
dispositions made by many psychological theorists (e.g.,
Baron, 1985, 1988, 1993; Ennis, 1987; Moshman, 1994;

This document is copyrighted by the American Psychological Association or one of its allied publishers.
This article is intended solely for the personal use of the individual user and is not to be disseminated broadly.

344

STANOVICH AND WEST

Norris, 1992; Perkins et al., 1993). We shall use this distinction in our analysis of performance on an argument
evaluation task in which belief bias must be avoided.
Cognitive capacities refer to the type of cognitive processes studied by information processing researchers who
are seeking the underlying cognitive basis of performance
on IQ tests. Perceptual speed, discrimination accuracy,
working memory capacity, and the efficiency of the retrieval of information stored in long-term memory are examples of cognitive capacities that underlie traditional psychometric intelligence (Carpenter, Just, & Shell, 1990;
Estes, 1982; Hunt, 1978, 1987; Lohman, 1989). As proxies
for these processes, we used two global indicators of cognitive ability—Scholastic Aptitude Test (SAT) scores and a
vocabulary test—that are known to correlate with a variety
of cognitive subprocesses (Carroll, 1993; Matarazzo, 1972)
that have been linked to neurophysiological and information
processing indicators of efficient cognitive functioning
(Caryl, 1994; Deary, 1995; Deary & Stough, 1996; Detterman, 1994; Hunt, 1987; Vernon, 1991, 1993; Vernon &
Mori, 1992).
In contrast to cognitive capacities, thinking dispositions
are best viewed as more malleable cognitive styles (see
Baron, 1985). Because thinking dispositions and cognitive
capacity are thought to differ in their degree of malleability,
it is important to determine the relative proportion of variance in critical thinking skills (such as argument evaluation)
that can be explained by each. To the extent that thinking
dispositions explain variance in a critical thinking skill
independent of cognitive capacity, theorists such as Baron
(1985, 1988, 1993) would predict that the skill would be
more teachable.
Further, such a partitioning is theoretically important because it is likely that the two constructs (cognitive ability
and thinking dispositions) are at different levels of analysis
in a cognitive theory. Variation in cognitive ability refers to
individual differences in the efficiency of processing at the
algorithmic level, whereas thinking dispositions of the type
that we studied in this investigation elucidate individual
differences at the rational level of analysis (Anderson, 1990;
Stanovich, in press)—they index differences in goals and
epistemic values. Many cognitive processes have been analyzed with concepts from the algorithmic level exclusively
(Baron, 1985), and this has often impeded understanding.
As educational psychologists become more concerned with
thinking styles that are at the interface of cognitive and
personality theory (see Goff & Ackerman, 1992; Keating,
1990; Moshman, 1994; Perkins et al., 1993; Sternberg &
Ruzgis, 1994) it is critical that analyses of cognitive tasks
encompass the rational as well as the algorithmic level of
analysis.
A New Analytic Strategy for Assessing Argument
Evaluation Ability
In this investigation, we employed the cognitive
capacity-thinking disposition distinction as a framework for
examining individual differences in the ability to reason
about argument structure and avoid potential belief bias. We

also introduce an analytic technique for developing separate
indices of a person's reliance on the quality of an argument
and on their prior personal beliefs about the issue in question. Our methodology involved assessing, on a separate
instrument, the participant's prior beliefs about a series of
propositions. On an argument evaluation measure, administered at a later time, the participants evaluated the quality
of arguments related to the same propositions. The arguments had an operationally determined objective quality
that varied from item to item. Our analytic strategy was to
regress each participant's evaluations of the argument simultaneously, on the objective measure of argument quality
and on the strength of the belief that he or she had about the
propositions prior to reading the argument. The standardized beta weight for argument quality then becomes an
index of that participant's reliance on the quality of the
arguments independent of their beliefs on the issues in
question. Conversely, the standardized beta weight for the
participant's prior belief reflects the biasing effects of beliefs on judgments of argument quality for that particular
participant. The magnitude of the former statistic becomes
an index of argument-driven, or data-driven processing (to
use Norman's [1976] term), and the magnitude of the latter
statistic becomes an index of the extent of belief-driven
processing.
Our methodology is different from the traditional logic
used in critical thinking tests, and it is a more sensitive one
for measuring individual differences. For example, those
who devise standardized critical thinking tests often simply
try to balance opinions across items by using a variety of
issues and by relying on chance to ensure that prior belief
and strength of the argument are relatively balanced from
respondent to respondent (Watson & Glaser, 1980). In contrast, we actually measured the prior opinion and took it into
account in the analysis (for related techniques, see Klaczynski & Gordon, 1996; Kuhn, 1991, 1993; Kuhn, Amsel, &
O'Loughlin, 1988; Slusher & Anderson, 1996). The technique allowed us to examine thought processes in areas of
"hot" cognition in which biases are most likely to operate
(Babad, 1987; Babad & Katz, 1991; Granberg & Brent,
1983; Kunda, 1990; Pyszczynski & Greenberg, 1987).
Research Plan
We first used the analytic logic described above on an
experimental instrument we call the Argument Evaluation
Test (AET). Subsequent to isolating individual differences
in data-driven versus belief-driven thinking on the AET, we
present a preliminary examination of the correlates of these
individual differences. We examined whether the primary
index of data-driven processing is correlated with measures
of cognitive ability. As proxies for the latter, we used SAT
scores and a vocabulary test.1 We also examined whether
1

As mentioned previously, tests such as these have been linked
to neurophysiological and information processing indicators of
efficient cognitive functioning (e.g., Deary, 1995; Hunt, 1987;
Vernon, 1993).

This document is copyrighted by the American Psychological Association or one of its allied publishers.
This article is intended solely for the personal use of the individual user and is not to be disseminated broadly.

REASONING AND PRIOR BELIEF
thinking dispositions can account for variance in performance on the AET after cognitive ability has been partialled
out (and the converse). In these analyses, we focused on
whether we needed to implicate the rational level of explanation (corresponding to thinking dispositions) in addition
to computational capacity to explain bias-free reasoning
skill.
Within the larger domain of thinking dispositions, we
examined those that we viewed as most relevant to rational
thought, which we conceptualize as thought processes leading to more accurate belief formation, to more consistent
belief-desire networks, and to more optimal actions (Audi,
1993a, 1993b; Baron, 1994; Gauthier, 1986; Gibbard, 1990;
Goldman, 1986; Harman, 1995; Nozick, 1993; Stanovich,
1994, in press; Thagard, 1992). In our sampling of thinking
dispositions to investigate, we focused in particular on
thinking dispositions with potential epistemic significance,
for example, "the disposition to weigh new evidence against
a favored belief heavily (or lightly), the disposition to spend
a great deal of time (or very little) on a problem before
giving up, or the disposition to weigh heavily the opinions
of others in forming one's own" (Baron, 1985, p. 15). Baron
(1985, 1988, 1993) has called such tendencies dispositions
toward actively open-minded thinking.
We constructed our thinking dispositions measure by
drawing on scales already described in the literature and by
constructing some of our own. Several of our measures had
strong similarities to other related measures in the literature
(Cacioppo, Petty, Feinstein, & Jarvis, 1996; Schommer,
1990, 1993, 1994; Schommer & Walker, 1995; Webster &
Kruglanski, 1994). Perhaps the strongest similarities are
with the two dispositional factors that Schommer (1990,
1993) called "belief in simple knowledge" and "belief in
certain knowledge." However, aspects of the need for cognition (Cacioppo et al., 1996) and the need for closure
(Kruglanski & Webster, 1996) constructs are also represented in our scale. Overall, we attempted to tap the following dimensions: epistemological absolutism, willingness
to perspective-switch, willingness to decontextualize, and
the tendency to consider alternative opinions and evidence.

Method

Participants
The participants were 349 undergraduate students (134 men and
215 women) recruited through an introductory psychology participant pool at a medium-sized state university. Their mean age was
18 years 10 months (SD = 2.2). There were no gender differences
on any of the experimental measures, so this variable will not be
considered further.

Argument Evaluation Test
The argument evaluation test (AET) consisted of two parts. In
the first, participants indicated their degree of agreement with a
series of 23 target propositions on a 4-point scale: 4 (strongly
agree), 3 (agree), 2 (disagree) and 1 (strongly disagree). With one
exception, the propositions all concerned real social and political

345

issues on which people hold varying, and sometimes strong, beliefs (e.g., gun control, taxes, university governance, crime, automobile speed limits). For example, the following target proposition
was in one item: "The welfare system should be drastically cut
back in size." Scores on this part of the questionnaire sometimes
are referred to in an abbreviated fashion as prior belief scores. The
AET prior belief items varied greatly in the degree to which
the sample as a whole endorsed them—from a low of 1.79 for the
item, "It is more dangerous to travel by air than by car" to a high
of 3.64 for the item, "Seat belts should always be worn when
traveling in a car."
After completing several other questionnaires and tasks, the
participants completed the second part of the AET. The instructions introduced the participants to a fictitious individual, Dale,
whose arguments they were to evaluate. Each of the 23 items on
the second part of the instrument began with Dale stating a belief
about an issue. The 23 beliefs were identical to the target propositions that the participants had rated their degree of agreement
with on the prior belief part of the instrument (e.g., "The welfare
system should be drastically cut back in size"). Dale then provided
a justification for the belief (in this case, e.g., "The welfare system
should be drastically reduced in size because welfare recipients
take advantage of the system and buy expensive foods with their
food stamps"). A critic then presents an argument to counter this
justification (e.g., "Ninety-five percent of welfare recipients use
their food stamps to obtain the bare essentials for their families").
The participant is told to assume that the facts in the counterargument are correct. Finally, Dale attempts to rebut the counterargument (e.g., "Many people who are on welfare are lazy and don't
want to work for a living"). Again assuming that the facts in the
rebuttal are correct, the participant is told to evaluate the strength
of Dale's rebuttal to the critic's argument. The instructions remind
the participant that he or she is to focus on the quality of Dale's
rebuttal and to ignore whether or not he or she agreed with Dale's
original belief. The participant then evaluated the strength of the
rebuttal on a 4-point scale: 4 (very strong), 3 (strong), 2 (weak),
and 1 (very weak). The remaining 22 items were structured analogously. A deliberate attempt was made to vary the quality of the
rebuttals. The mean evaluation of the rebuttals ranged from 1.93 to
3.41 across the 23 items.
The instructions and several examples of items from the second
part of the AET are presented in Appendix A. The full set of AET
items, as well as the items on the Thinking Dispositions Questionnaire (to be described below) are available from Keith E. Stanovich on request.
The analysis of performance on the AET required that the
participants' evaluations of argument quality be compared to some
objective standard. We used a summary measure of eight experts'
evaluations of these rebuttals as an operationally defined standard
of argument quality. Specifically, three full-time faculty members
of the Department of Philosophy at the University of Washington,
three full-time faculty members of the Department of Philosophy
at the University of California, Berkeley, and the two authors
judged the strength of the rebuttals. The median correlation between the judgments of the eight experts was .74. Although we
devised the problems, the median correlations between our judgments and those of the external experts were reasonably high (.78
and .73, respectively) and roughly equal to the median correlation
among the judgments of the six external experts themselves (.73).
Thus, for the purposes of the regression analyses described below,
the median of the eight experts' judgments of the rebuttal quality
served as the objective index of argument quality for each item.
These scores will sometimes be referred to in an abbreviated
fashion as the argument quality variable. This variable ranged from

This document is copyrighted by the American Psychological Association or one of its allied publishers.
This article is intended solely for the personal use of the individual user and is not to be disseminated broadly.

346

STANOVICH AND WEST

1.0 to 4.0 across the 23 items. Eight rebuttals received a score of
1.0, three received a score of 1.5, three received a score of 2.0, two
received a score of 2.5, four received a score of 3.0, and three
received a score of 4.0.
As an example, on the above item, the median of the experts'
ratings of the rebuttal was 1.5 (between weak and very weak). The
mean rating that the participants gave the item was 1.93 (weak),
although the participants' mean prior belief score indicated a
neutral opinion (2.64). Our attempt to construct items so that
objectively strong and weak arguments were equally associated
with the prior beliefs that we thought participants would endorse
was very successful, as there was a nonsignificant .01 correlation
between the sample's mean prior belief scores and objective argument quality. Further details of the analysis of this task are
presented in the Results section.
One indication of the validity of the experts' ratings is that the
experts were vastly more consistent among themselves in their
evaluation of the items than were the participants. Because the
median correlation among the eight experts' judgments was .74, a
parallel analysis of consistency among the participants was conducted to provide a comparison. Forty-three groups of 8 participants were formed, and the correlations among the argument
evaluations for the 8 individuals in each group were calculated.
The median correlation for each of the 43 groups was then determined. The highest median across all of the 43 groups was .59.
Thus, not one of the 43 groups attained the level of agreement
achieved by the eight experts. The mean of the median correlations
in the 43 groups was .28, markedly below the degree of consistency in the experts' judgments.

General Ability Measures
SAT scores. Because SAT scores were not available to us
because of university restrictions, students were asked to indicate
their verbal and mathematical SAT scores on a demographics
sheet. The mean reported verbal SAT score of the students was 529
(SD ~ 72), the mean reported mathematical SAT score was 578
(SD = 72), and the mean total SAT score was 1107 (SD = 108).
These reported scores match the averages of this institution (520,
587, and 1107) quite closely (Straughn & Straughn, 1995; all SAT
scores were from administrations of the test prior to its recent
rescaling). A further indication of the validity of the self-reported
scores is that the correlation between a vocabulary test (described
below) and the reported SAT total score (.49) was quite similar to
the .51 correlation between the vocabulary checklist and verified
total SAT scores in a previous investigation with the same vocabulary measure (West & Stanovich, 1991). A final indication of the
validity of the SAT reports is that the vocabulary test displayed a
higher correlation with the verbal SAT scores (.61) than with the
mathematical SAT scores (.13). The difference between these
dependent correlations (see Cohen & Cohen, 1983, pp. 56-57)
was highly significant (p < .001).
Vocabulary test. As an additional converging measure of cognitive ability to supplement the SAT scores, a brief vocabulary
measure was administered to the participants (because vocabulary
is the strongest specific correlate of general intelligence, see Matarazzo, 1972). This task employed the checklist-with-foils format
that has been shown to be reliable and valid in assessing individual
differences in vocabulary knowledge (Anderson & Freebody,
1983; Cooksey & Freebody, 1987; White, Slater, & Graves, 1989;
Zimmerman, Broder, Shaughnessy, & Underwood, 1977). The
stimuli for the task were 40 words and 20 pronounceable nonwords
taken largely from the stimulus list of Zimmerman et al. (1977).
The words and nonwords were intermixed through alphabetization.

The participants were told that some of the letter strings were
actual words and that others were not and that their task was to
read through the list of items and to put a check mark next to those
that they knew were words. Scoring on the task was determined by
taking the proportion of the target items that were checked and
subtracting the proportion of foils checked. Other corrections for
guessing and differential criterion effects (see Snodgrass & Corwin, 1988) produced virtually identical correlational results. The
scores ranged from .100 to .925. The split-half reliability of the
number of correct items checked was .87 (Spearman-Brown
corrected).

Thinking Dispositions Questionnaire
Participants completed a questionnaire consisting of a number
of subscales. The response format for each item in the questionnaire (with the exception of the outcome bias items) was 6 (agree
strongly), 5 (agree moderately), 4 (agree slightly), 3 (disagree
slightly), 2 (disagree moderately), and 1 (disagree strongly). The
items from the subscales were randomly intermixed in the questionnaire. The subscales were as follows:
Flexible Thinking scale. We devised the items on the Flexible
Thinking scale. The design of the items was influenced by a
variety of sources from the critical thinking literature (e.g., Ennis,
1987; Facione, 1992; Nickerson, 1987; Norris & Ennis, 1989;
Perkins et al., 1993; Zechmeister & Johnson, 1992) but most
specifically by the work of Baron (1985, 1988, 1993). Baron has
emphasized that actively open-minded thinking is a multifaceted
construct encompassing the cultivation of reflectiveness rather
than impulsivity, the seeking and processing of information that
disconfirms one's belief (as opposed to confirmation bias in evidence seeking), and the willingness to change one's beliefs in the
face of contradictory evidence. There were 10 items on the Flexible Thinking scale, some tapping the disposition toward reflectivity ("If I think longer about a problem I will be more likely to
solve it;" "Difficulties can usually be overcome by thinking about
the problem, rather than through waiting for good fortune;" "Intuition is the best guide in making decisions;" and "Coming to
decisions quickly is a sign of wisdom"—the latter two reverse
scored), willingness to consider evidence contradictory to beliefs
(e.g., "People should always take into consideration evidence that
goes against their beliefs"), willingness to consider alternative
opinions and explanations ("A person should always consider new
possibilities," "Considering too many different opinions often
leads to bad decisions," the latter reverse scored), and a tolerance
for ambiguity combined with a willingness to postpone closure
("There is nothing wrong with being undecided about many issues," "Changing your mind is a sign of weakness," and "Basically, I know everything I need to know about the important things
in life,"—the latter two reverse scored). The scores on this scale
ranged from 30 to 59. The split-half reliability of the scale was .49
(Spearman-Brown corrected), and Cronbach's alpha was .50.
Openness-Ideas subscale. The eight items from the OpennessIdeas facet of the Revised NEO Personality Inventory (Costa &
McCrae, 1992) were administered (e.g., "I have a lot of intellectual
curiosity;" "I find philosophical arguments boring"—the latter
reverse scored). The scores on this scale ranged from 15 to 48. The
split-half reliability of the scale was .73 (Spearman-Brown corrected), and Cronbach's alpha was .77.
Openness-Values subscale. The eight items from the
Openness-Values facet of the Revised NEO Personality Inventory
were administered (e.g., "I believe that laws and social policies
should change to reflect the needs of a changing world;" "I believe
letting students hear controversial speakers can only confuse and

This document is copyrighted by the American Psychological Association or one of its allied publishers.
This article is intended solely for the personal use of the individual user and is not to be disseminated broadly.

REASONING AND PRIOR BELIEF
mislead them"—the latter reverse scored). The scores on this scale
ranged from 13 to 48. The split-half reliability of the scale was .73
(Spearman-Brown corrected), and Cronbach's alpha was .71.
Absolutism subscale. This scale was adapted from the Scale of
Intellectual Development (SID) developed by Erwin (1981, 1983).
The SID represents an attempt to develop a multiple-choice scale
to measure Perry's (1970) hypothesized stages of epistemological
development in young adulthood. It is similar to related work in
the literature (King & Kitchener, 1994; Kramer, Kahlhaugh, &
Goldston, 1992; Schommer, 1990, 1993, 1994). We chose nine
items designed to tap Perry's early stages that are characterized by
an absolutist orientation. These early stages are characterized by
cognitive rigidity, by a belief that issues can be couched in
either-or terms, by a belief that there is one right answer to every
complex problem, and by reliance on authority for belief justification. This orientation is captured by items such as "In most
situations requiring a decision, it is better to listen to someone who
knows what they are doing;" "It is better to simply believe in a
religion than to be confused by doubts about it;'* "Right and wrong
never change;" and "I can't enjoy the company of people who
don't share my moral values." The scores on this scale ranged from
9 to 46. The split-half reliability of the scale was .69 (SpearmanBrown corrected), and Cronbach's alpha was .64.
Dogmatism subscale. The Dogmatism subscale consisted of
nine items. Three were taken from a short-form field version
(Troldahl & Powell, 1965) of Rokeach's (1960) Dogmatism scale:
"Of all the different philosophies which exist in the world there is
probably only one which is correct;" "Even though freedom of
speech for all groups is a worthwhile goal, it is unfortunately
necessary to restrict the freedom of certain political groups;" and
"There are two kinds of people in this world: those who are for the
truth and those who are against the truth". Two items were drawn
from the Dogmatic Thinking scale used by Paulhus and Reid
(1991): "Often, when people criticize me, they don't have their
facts straight" and "No one can talk me out of something I know
is right." Four items were taken from the full Rokeach scale
published in Robinson, Shaver, and Wrightsman (1991): "A group
which tolerates too much difference of opinion among its members
cannot exist for long;" "There are a number of people I have come
to hate because of the things they stand for;" "My blood boils over
whenever a person stubbornly refuses to admit he's wrong;" and
"Most people just don't know what's good for them." The scores
on this scale ranged from 11 to 44. The split-half reliability of the
scale was .54 (Spearman-Brown corrected), and Cronbach's alpha
was .60.
Categorical Thinking subscale. Three items from the Categorical Thinking subscale of Epstein and Meier's (1989) Constructive
Thinking Inventory were administered: "There are basically two
kinds of people in this world, good and bad;" "I think there are
many wrong ways, but only one right way, to almost anything;"
and "I tend to classify people as either for me or against me." The
scores on this scale ranged from 3 to 16.
Superstitious Thinking subscale. This task was included because of our longstanding interest in the correlates of paranormal
belief (Stanovich, 1989), The seven items on this scale consisted of
four items concerning the concept of luck (e.g., "I have personal
possessions that bring me luck at times;" "The number 13 is
unlucky") adapted from the Paranormal Beliefs Questionnaire
developed by Tobacyk and Milford (1983) and three items from
the Superstitious Thinking subscale of Epstein and Meier's (1989)
Constructive Thinking Inventory. The scores on this scale ranged
from 7 to 38. The split-half reliability of the scale was .73
(Spearman-Brown corrected), and Cronbach's alpha was .73.
Counterfactual Thinking scale. As an indicator of the ability to

347

decenter and adopt alternative perspectives, we devised a two-item
scale designed to tap counterfactual thinking. The two scale items
were "My beliefs would not have been very different if I had been
raised by a different set of parents;" and "Even if my environment
(family, neighborhood, schools) had been different, I probably
would have the same religious views." Both items were reversed
scored so that higher scores indicated counterfactual thinking. The
scores on this scale ranged from 2 to 12.
Outcome Bias subscale. As an indicator of the disposition
toward decontextualization, we chose the phenomenon of outcome
bias. Our measure of outcome bias derived from a problem investigated by Baron and Hershey (1988):
A 55-year-old man had a heart condition. He had to stop
working because of chest pain. He enjoyed his work and did
not want to stop. His pain also interfered with other things,
such as travel and recreation. A successful bypass operation
would relieve his pain and increase his life expectancy from
age 65 to age 70. However, 8% of the people who have this
operation die from the operation itself. His physician decided
to go ahead with the operation. The operation succeeded.
Evaluate the physician's decision to go ahead with the
operation.
Participants responded on a seven-point scale ranging from
incorrect, a very bad decision to clearly correct, an excellent
decision. This question appeared early in the questionnaire. Later
in the questionnaire, participants evaluated a different decision to
perform surgery that was designed to be objectively better than the
first (2% chance of death rather than 8%, 10-year increase in life
expectancy versus 5-year increase, etc.) even though it had an
unfortunate negative outcome (death of the patient). Participants
reported on the same scale as before. An outcome bias was
demonstrated when these two items were compared: 118 participants rated the positive outcome decision as better than the negative outcome decision, 178 participants rated the two decisions
equally, and 53 participants rated the negative outcome decision as
the better decision. The measure of outcome bias that we used was
the scale value of the decision on the positive outcome case (from
1 to 7) minus the scale value of the negative outcome decision. The
higher the value, the more the outcome bias. The mean outcome
bias score was .358, which was significantly different from zero,
r(348) = 5.43, p < .001. We interpret low outcome bias scores as
indicating greater decontextualization.
Social Desirability Response Bias subscale. Five items reflecting social desirability response bias (Furnham, 1986; Paulhus &
Reid, 1991) were taken from the Balanced Inventory of Desirable
Responding (Paulhus, 1991): "I always obey laws, even if I'm
unlikely to get caught;" "I don't gossip about other people's
business;" "I sometimes tell lies if I have to;" 'There have been
occasions when I have taken advantage of someone;" and "I have
said something bad about a friend behind his or her back." The
scores on this scale ranged from 5 to 26.
Composite Actively Open-Minded Thinking score. Because
several of the scales displayed moderate intercorrelations (see
Appendix B), a composite actively open-minded thinking (AOT)
score was formed by summing the scores on the Flexible Thinking,
Openness-Ideas, and Openness-Values scales and subtracting the
sum of the Absolutism, Dogmatism, and Categorical Thinking
scales. Thus, high scores on the AOT composite indicate openness
to belief change and cognitive flexibility, whereas low scores
indicate cognitive rigidity and resistance to belief change. The
creation of this composite scale was justified by a principal components analysis conducted on the eight subscales (these six subscales plus the Superstitious Thinking and Counterfactual Think-

STANOVICH AND WEST

348

35

ing scales). Two components had eigenvalues greater than one.
The loadings, displayed in Appendix C, are subsequent to varimax
rotation. The first component, which accounted for 40.8% of the
variance, received high loadings from each of the six subscales in
the AOT score. Counterfactual thinking, which failed to correlate
with the other variables, primarily defined the second component
that accounted for only 13.5% of the variance and barely made the
eigenvalue >1 criterion (1.083). Use of a factor score for the first
component produced results virtually identical to those from the
unit-weighted composite; therefore we have used the latter, more
parsimonious index.2 The scores on this scale ranged from - 9 to
112. The split-half reliability of the composite scale was .90
(Spearman-Brown corrected), and Cronbach's alpha was .88.

25-

This document is copyrighted by the American Psychological Association or one of its allied publishers.
This article is intended solely for the personal use of the individual user and is not to be disseminated broadly.

Results
Individual differences in participants' relative reliance on
objective argument quality and prior belief were examined
by running separate regression analyses on each participant's responses. That is, a separate multiple regression
equation was constructed for each participant. The participant's evaluations of argument quality served as the criterion variable in each of 349 separate regression analyses.
The 23 evaluation scores were regressed simultaneously on
both the 23 argument quality scores and the 23 prior belief
scores. Thus, a total of 349 individual regression analyses
(one for each participant) were conducted. For each participant, these analyses resulted in two beta weights—one for
argument quality and one for prior belief. The former beta
weight—an indication of the degree of reliance on argument
quality independent of prior belief—is the primary indicator
of the ability to evaluate arguments independent of one's
beliefs.
The mean multiple correlation across the 349 separate
regressions in which each participant's evaluations were
regressed on the objective argument quality scores and on
his or her prior belief scores was .451 {SD = .158). Across
the 349 regressions, the mean standardized beta weight for
argument quality was .330 {SD = .222). These latter values
varied widely—from a low of —.489 to a high of .751.
However, the variation was asymmetric around zero, as is
clear from Figure 1, which plots the frequency distribution
of the standardized beta weights for argument quality. Only
30 of 349 participants had beta weights less than zero.
Across the 349 regressions, the mean standardized beta
weight for the participant's prior belief scores was .151
{SD — .218). Although low, this mean was significantly
different from zero, f(348) = 12.93, p < .001. Nevertheless,
these values also varied widely—from a low of -.406 to a

Count

-

10

5
n

Procedure

fir

ri

-

-.6

Participants completed the tasks during a single 2-hour session
in which they also completed some other tasks that were not part
of this investigation. They were tested in small groups of 3 to 8
individuals. The order of administration of the tasks subsequent to
filling out the demographics sheet was outcome bias (Part 1), the
AET prior belief section, Thinking Dispositions Questionnaire,
outcome bias (Part 2), vocabulary test, and the AET evaluation
section.

|

30

n rmrr

Jiff

-.4 -.2
0
.2
.4
.6
.8
Beta Weight - Argument Quality

Figure 1. Frequency distribution of the beta weights for argument quality in the multiple regressions conducted on each participant's responses on the Argument Evaluation Test.

high of .662, as indicated in Figure 2, which displays a plot
of die frequency distribution of the standardized beta
weights. Thus, as both figures indicate, individuals vary
substantially in their reliance on argument quality and prior
belief when evaluating the arguments.
As mentioned previously, we view the beta weight for
argument quality as the primary measure of the participant's
ability to reason independently of their own beliefs. Thus,
we explored the correlates of this ability by splitting the
sample in half on the basis of this index.3 A median split of
the sample resulted in a subsample of 174 participants with
mean beta weights for argument quality of .504 (termed
HIARG because of their high reliance on argument quality)
and 175 low scoring participants having mean argument
quality beta weights of .156 (termed LOARG because of
their low reliance on argument quality). The difference in
beta weights was highly significant, #347) = 23.56, p <
.001. The mean beta weight for prior belief in the HIARG
group (.128) was also significantly lower than the beta
weight for prior belief in the LOARG group (.173),
f(347) = 1.98, p < .05, indicating that this median split
reliably partitioned the sample into a group of participants
relatively more reliant on argument quality for their argument evaluation decisions (HIARG) and a group relatively
more reliant on their prior belief about the issue when
making argument evaluation decisions (LOARG).
As indicated in Table 1, the mean SAT total scores of the
HIARG group were significantly {p < .001) higher than
2

The creation of this composite scale was also justified by a
principal components analysis conducted on the 56 items from all
of the scales. The dominant first principal component was primarily composed of high loadings for the items from the six scales
comprising the AOT score. Other items displayed small loadings
on this component and instead contributed to several of the minor
components.
5
We obtained virtually identical results by using as a variable
the beta weight for argument quality minus the beta weight for
prior belief. Therefore, the simpler index—the beta weight for
argument quality—was employed in the subsequent analyses.

REASONING AND PRIOR BELIEF

This document is copyrighted by the American Psychological Association or one of its allied publishers.
This article is intended solely for the personal use of the individual user and is not to be disseminated broadly.

-.6

-.4

-.2

0

.2

.4

.6

Beta Weight - Prior Belief

Figure 2. Frequency distribution of the beta weights for prior
belief in the multiple regressions conducted on each participant's
responses on the Argument Evaluation Test.
those of the LOARG group, indicating that the group more
reliant on argument quality for their judgments was higher
in cognitive ability. This finding was confirmed by the
existence of differences in favor of the HIARG group on the
vocabulary test (p < .001).
The remainder of Table 1 presents comparisons of the two
groups on the different scales of the Thinking Dispositions
Questionnaire. The HIARG group scored significantly
higher on the Flexible Thinking scale, OpenmindednessIdeas, and Openmindedness-Values scales and significantly
lower on the Absolutism, Dogmatism, and Categorical
Thinking scales. The AOT composite variable, formed by a
linear combination of these six scales (forming the composite from standardized scores of the variables resulted in
virtually identical results), displayed a highly significant
(p < .001) difference. The HIARG group also displayed
significantly lower scores on the Superstitious Thinking
scale, significantly higher scores on the two-item Counterfactual Thinking scale, and showed significantly less outcome bias. None of the response patterns were due to a
tendency for the HIARG group to give more socially desirable responses because the groups did not differ on that
variable.
As the results displayed in Table 1 indicate, a consistent
pattern of differences on the thinking dispositions measures
was observed. The group of participants who displayed
more reliance on argument quality in their judgments on the
Argument Evaluation Test consistently displayed more
openmindedness, cognitive flexibility, and skepticism, and
less dogmatism and cognitive rigidity. However, as Table 1
also indicates, the groups differed in cognitive ability (SAT
and vocabulary scores). Thus, it is possible that the differences in thinking dispositions are merely a function of
cognitive ability differences. The analyses displayed in Table 2 were designed to address the question of whether
differences in thinking dispositions between the groups
were entirely attributable to differences in cognitive ability.
These analyses were structured to examine the question of
whether thinking dispositions can predict performance on

349

the AET even after cognitive ability has been partialled
out.
The criterion variable in the series of hierarchical regression analyses presented in Table 2 was the beta weight for
argument quality on the AET. Entered first into the regression equation was the SAT total score which, not surprisingly, given the results displayed in Table 1, accounted for
a significant proportion of variance.4 However, listed next
are alternative second steps in the hierarchical analysis. As
the table indicates, the AOT composite score accounted for
significant variance in performance on the AET even after
SAT scores were entered into the equation—as did scores
on the superstitious thinking, outcome bias (a measure of
decontextualization), and counterfactual thinking (a measure of perspective switching) measures. Thus, the linkage
between thinking dispositions and performance on the AET
illustrated in Table 1 is not entirely due to covariance with
cognitive ability. Various measures of thinking dispositions
are predictors, independent of SAT scores.
The second analysis displayed in Table 2 forces in AOT
scores as a predictor first. Its zero-order correlation with the
beta weight for argument quality (.292) is somewhat lower
than that for SAT scores (.353) but is of the same order of
magnitude. The table indicates that after AOT scores are in
the equation, the measure of outcome bias accounted for
significant variance when entered as the second step. The
measure of counterfactual reasoning accounted for significant additional variance when entered as the third step, but
the superstitious thinking measure did not account for significant additional variance when entered as the fourth—
however, the multiple R of the dispositions measures, .341,
now approaches that for SAT scores. The latter, when
entered as the fifth step, accounted for 7.8% unique variance
(p < .001) indicating that this measure of cognitive ability
accounts for substantial additional variance after all of the
variance associated with the thinking dispositions measures
has been partialled out.
A stepwise regression analysis with these same variables
was also conducted. The first variable to enter was SAT
scores, which accounted for 12.4% of the variance (p <
.001). The next variable to enter the equation was the AOT
composite, which accounted for 3.7% additional variance
(p < .001). Entering third was the outcome bias variable,
which accounted for 1.7% additional variance (p < .05).
The last variable to explain significant unique variance was
the measure of counterfactual thinking, which explained
1.4% additional variance (p < .05). (The beta weights of all

4
A further validation of the experts' ratings comes from comparing the zero-order correlation of SAT scores and the beta
weight for the experts' ratings (.35) with the zero-order correlation
of SAT scores and the beta weights based on the mean ratings of
argument quality given by the participants (.23). This difference in
dependent correlations (see Cohen & Cohen, 1983, pp. 56—57)
was statistically significant, t(346) = 3.20, p < .01, indicating that
participants of higher cognitive ability were more likely to agree
with the experts in their judgments of argument quality than with
their fellow participants of lower cognitive ability.

350

STANOVICH AND WEST
Table 1

Mean Scores of Participants With Highest (n = 174) and Lowest (n = 175) Argument
Quality Scores on the Argument Evaluation Test (AET; Standard Deviations in
Parentheses)
LOARG

This document is copyrighted by the American Psychological Association or one of its allied publishers.
This article is intended solely for the personal use of the individual user and is not to be disseminated broadly.

Variable

HIARG

AET-argument quality (/3 weight)
.156 (.17)
.504 (.10)
23.56***
AET-prior belief (0 weight)
.173 (.24)
8 (.19)
1.98*
SAT total
1080
(106)
1133
(103)
4 54***
Vocabulary checklist
.528 (.160)
.592 (.150)
3.89***
Thinking dispositions
Flexible Tninking scale
44.2 (4.6)
45.5 (4.9)
2.59*
Openness-Ideas
32.5 (6.3)
34.6 (64)
3.00**
Openness- Values
34.4 (5.4)
36.8 (5.4)
4.06***
Absolutism scale
30.1 (5.7)
28.0 (6.1)
-3.25**
Dogmatism scale
30.5 (5.5)
28.2 (5.7)
-3.84***
Categorical Thinking
8.2 (2.7)
7.0 (2.6)
-4.05***
AOT composite
42.3 (21.7)
53.6 (22.9)
4 7^***
Superstitious Thinking
18.2 (6.0)
16.7 (5.4)
-236*
Counterfactual Thinking
8.2 (2.6)
9.0 (2.4)
3.12**
Outcome Bias
.583(1.3)
.144(1.2)
-3.33***
Social Desirability scale
14.9 (3-6)
15.2 (3.8)
0.84
Note, df - 347 for the AET and vocabulary checklist, 338 for the SAT total, and 346 for the
Thinking Dispositions Scales. LOARG = low reliance on argument quality; HIARG = high
reliance on argument quality; SAT = Scholastic Aptitude Test; AOT composite = (Flexible
Thinking scale + Openness-Ideas + Openness-Values) - (Absolutism scale + Dogmatism
scale + Categorical Thinking).

of these variables remained significant in the final simultaneous equation.)
An additional stepwise analysis was conducted with, as
potential predictors, all of the component subscales of the
AOT composite in addition to the variables in the previous
analysis. The results were highly convergent. In this stepwise regression, the first variable to be entered was SAT
scores, which accounted for 12.4% of the variance (p <
.001). The next variable to be entered to the equation was

Table 2
Hierarchical Regression Analyses Predicting Beta Weight
for Argument Quality on the Argument Evaluation Test
Step
1

2
2
2

2

•

R

M2

AF

Analysis 1
SAT total
.353
AOT composite
.401
Superstitious Thinking
.368
Outcome Bias
.391
Counterfactual Thinking .380

.124
.037
.012
.029
.020

47.86***
14.76***
4.36*
11.65***
7.80**

Variable

Analysis 2
AOT composite
.292 .085 31.42***
Outcome Bias
.315 .014
5.10*
2
3
Counterfactual Thinking .334 .012
4.66**
4
Superstitious Thinking
.341 .005
1.89
5
SAT total
.441 .078 32.30***
*p < .05. **p < .01. ***p < .001.
Note. SAT = Scholastic Aptitude Test; AOT composite = (Flexible Thinking scale + Openness-Ideas + Openness-Values) —
(Absolutism scale + Dogmatism scale + Categorical Thinking).
1

the Categorical Thinking subscale, which accounted for
3.7% additional variance (p < .001). Entering third was the
outcome bias variable, which accounted for 1.8% additional
variance (p < .05). The last variable to explain significant
unique variance was the measure of counterfactual thinking,
which explained 1.4% additional variance (p < .05). (The
beta weights of all of these variables remained significant in
the final simultaneous equation.)
We carried out a further, converging examination of the
covariance relationships among performance on the AET,
cognitive ability, and thinking dispositions by conducting a
commonality analysis (Kerlinger & Pedhazur, 1973). The
criterion variable in the analysis displayed in Table 3 was
again the beta weight for argument quality. In the hierarchical analyses that estimate the commonality components
(see Kerlinger & Pedhazur, 1973), cognitive ability and
thinking dispositions were defined by sets of variables (see
Cohen & Cohen, 1983). In this analysis, a more comprehensive index of cognitive ability was employed—the collective variance explained by the SAT and vocabulary
scores. Thinking dispositions were defined as the collective
variance explained by the AOT score, superstitious thinking, outcome bias, and counterfactual thinking measures.
In total, 20.0% of the variance in AET performance was
explained (multiple R = .447). A portion (8.4%) of this
variance explained was unique to cognitive ability, and
6.7% of the variance was uniquely explained by the thinking
dispositions. Only 4.9% of the variance explained was
common to the cognitive ability and thinking dispositions measures. Thus, the commonality analysis indicates
that there was considerable nonoveriap in the variance

REASONING AND PRIOR BELIEF
Table 3

Commonality Analysis Conducted With Beta Weight for
Argument Quality on the Argument Evaluation Test as the
Dependent Variable
Variance
Variable
Unique Common
Thinking dispositions .067
.049
Cognitive ability
.084
.049

Total
Variance
Explained

This document is copyrighted by the American Psychological Association or one of its allied publishers.
This article is intended solely for the personal use of the individual user and is not to be disseminated broadly.

.200
Note. Thinking dispositions = variance accounted for by actively openminded thinking composite, superstitious thinking, outcome bias, and counterfactual thinking scores; Cognitive ability =
variance accounted for by SAT and vocabulary scores.
in AET performance explained by cognitive ability and
thinking dispositions. The unique variance attributable
to each was larger than the common variance that they
shared.
Discussion
The analytic logic that we used in designing the Argument Evaluation Test was intended to provide a means of
separating prior belief from the assessment of how well an
individual can track argument quality. It is our contention
that the beta weight for argument quality in our analyses
captures a quintessential aspect of critical thought: the ability to evaluate the quality of an argument independent of
one's feelings and personal biases about the proposition at
issue. We have shown that there is considerable variability
in this index and that this variability has an orderly distribution (see Figure 1). Further, this variance can be reliably
linked to individual differences in cognitive ability and to
individual differences in thinking dispositions that have
epistemic significance.
Of course, numerous caveats are in order. Our regression
analyses estimated the beta weights from scores on only 23
items. A larger item set would presumably result in more
stable estimates, and this result would be highly desirable.
Nevertheless, the estimates were reliable enough to display
significant associations with measures of cognitive ability
and thinking dispositions. Also, regarding the latter, some
of our scales were based on only a small number of items.
Work with more extensive and refined scales is clearly
needed, although again, numerous significant associations
were detected with our new instruments and short scales.
Thinking Dispositions and Argument Evaluation
An important pattern in the analysis of individual differences was the relative separability of cognitive ability and
thinking dispositions as predictors of argument evaluation
performance. The regression and commonality analyses indicated that both were significant unique predictors and that
their unique variance as predictors exceeded the variance
that they had in common with each other. This finding
supports conceptualizations of human cognition that empha-

351

size the potential separability of cognitive capacities and
thinking dispositions as predictors of reasoning skill (e.g.,
Baron, 1985, 1988, 1993; Ennis, 1987; King & Kitchener,
1994; Kitchener & Fischer, 1990; Klaczynski, 1997; Norris,
1992; Siegel, 1993).
There are increasing indications that this separability is a
pervasive and replicable phenomenon. Schommer (1990)
found that a measure of belief in certain knowledge predicted the tendency to draw one-sided conclusions from
ambiguous evidence even after verbal ability was controlled. Kardash and Scholes (1996) found that the tendency
to properly draw inconclusive inferences from mixed evidence was related to belief in certain knowledge and need
for cognition scores. Further, these relationships were not
mediated by verbal ability because a vocabulary measure
was essentially unrelated to evidence evaluation. Likewise,
Klaczynski (1997; Klaczynski & Gordon, 1996) found
that the degree to which adolescents criticized beliefinconsistent evidence more than belief-consistent evidence
was unrelated to cognitive ability.
We found stronger relationships between cognitive ability
and the tendency to evaluate evidence independent of prior
beliefs than did these other studies, but there were numerous
important task differences that could have accounted for this
difference in results. For example, both Schommer (1990)
and Kardash and Scholes (1996) presented their participants
with conflicting evidence and arguments. Good reasoning
was thus defined as coming to an uncertain or tentative
conclusion. In our study, participants were not presented
with conflicting arguments but instead with a single argument to be evaluated as either strong or weak. It might be
that the cognitive processes involved in the two situations
are somewhat different.
The study by Klaczynski and Gordon (1996) presents a
different contrast. They presented participants with flawed
hypothetical experiments that led to either belief-consistent
or belief-inconsistent conclusions, and they then evaluated
the quality of the reasoning participants used when they
critiqued the flaws in the experiments. Klaczynski and Gordon (1996) found that verbal ability was related to the
quality of the reasoning in both the belief-consistent and
belief-inconsistent conditions. In their experiment, Klaczynski and Gordon observed a belief-bias effect—participants
found more flaws when the experiment's conclusions were
inconsistent than when they were consistent. However, verbal ability was not correlated with the magnitude of the
belief-bias effect—even though it was correlated with overall levels of reasoning in each of the different conditions
that were considered separately. It should be noted that the
belief-bias difference score in the Klaczynski and Gordon
study is not analogous to the regression coefficient for
argument quality in the present study. A high score on the
belief-bias difference score in the Klaczynski and Gordon
study is a direct indicator of the magnitude of the belief-bias
effect, whereas a low score for argument quality in our
paradigm may come about in a variety of ways. High
correlations of participant evaluations with prior beliefs do
serve to reduce the beta weight for argument quality in our
analyses. However, the beta weight for argument quality in

This document is copyrighted by the American Psychological Association or one of its allied publishers.
This article is intended solely for the personal use of the individual user and is not to be disseminated broadly.

352

STANOVICH AND WEST

our paradigm will also be low if a participant is simply a
poor argument evaluator.
In short, Klaczynski and Gordon's (1996) index is a direct
measure of belief bias; ours is a measure of the ability to
reason in situations in which prior beliefs may be interfering
(i.e., reasoning in the face of potentially interfering prior
beliefs). Our measure combines context-free reasoning ability with the ability to ignore belief bias. It is thus a more
complex index (and clearly less desirable than a direct
belief-bias index for some purposes). The fact that it is in
part determined by context-free reasoning ability probably
explains why we observed relationships with cognitive
ability.
Although cognitive ability was implicated in performance
on our task more strongly than it was in some other investigations (Kardash & Scholes, 1996; Schommer, 1990), our
results converge with others strongly in indicating that
epistemic dispositions can predict argument evaluation skill
even when cognitive ability is partialled out. In the stepwise
regression analyses, in addition to SAT scores, a measure of
decontextualization (outcome bias), a measure of perspective switching (counterfactual thinking), and measures of
epistemological absolutism (AOT composite and Categorical Thinking subscale) proved to be significant unique
predictors.
Why might thinking dispositions continue to be unique
predictors of AET performance even after cognitive ability
has been partialled out? We posited earlier in this article that
these two constructs (cognitive ability and thinking dispositions) are actually at different levels of analysis in a
cognitive theory and that they do separate explanatory work.
Variation in cognitive ability refers to individual differences
in the efficiency of processing at the algorithmic level. In
contrast, thinking dispositions of the type studied in this
investigation elucidate individual differences at the rational
level. These dispositions are telling us about the individual's goals and epistemic values (King & Kitchener, 1994;
Kitcher, 1993; Kruglanski, 1989; Kruglanski & Webster,
1996; Pintrich, Marx, & Boyle, 1993; Schommer, 1990,
1993, 1994). For example, consider an individual who
scores high on measures such as the Flexible Thinking scale
and low on measures such as the Dogmatism and Absolutism scales—a person who agrees with statements such as
"People should always take into consideration evidence that
goes against their beliefs" and who disagrees with statements such as "No one can talk me out of something I know
is right." Such a response pattern is indicating that changing
beliefs to get closer to the truth is an important goal for this
person. This individual is signaling that they value being an
accurate belief forming system more than they value holding on to the beliefs that they currently have (see Cederblom, 1989 for an insightful discussion of this distinction).
In contrast, consider a person scoring low on the Flexible
Thinking scale and high on measures such as the Absolutism and Categorical Thinking scales—a person who disagrees with statements such as "A person should always
consider new possibilities" and who agrees with statements
such as "There are a number of people I have come to hate
because of the things they stand for." Such a response

pattern is indicating mat retaining current beliefs is an
important goal for this person. This individual is signaling
that they value highly the beliefs that they currently have
and that they put a very small premium on mechanisms that
might improve belief accuracy (but that involve belief
change).
In short, thinking dispositions of the type we have examined provide information about epistemic goals at the rational level of analysis. Within such a conceptualization, we
can perhaps better understand why the thinking dispositions
predicted additional variance in AET performance after
cognitive ability was partialled out. This result may indicate
that to understand variation in reasoning in such a task we
need to examine more than just differences at the algorithmic level (computational capacity)—we must know something about the epistemic goals of the reasoners.
In short, performance on the AET—a task requiring reasoning about previously held beliefs—is certainly dependent on the computational capacity of the participant, but it
also depends on the balance of epistemic goals held by the
reasoners. The instructions for the task dictate that one
totally discount prior belief in evaluating the argument, but
individuals may differ in their willingness or ability to adapt
to such instructions. Individuals who put a low epistemic
priority on maintaining current beliefs may find the instructions easy to follow. In contrast, those who attach high
epistemic value to belief maintenance might find the standard instructions much harder to follow. Thus, epistemic
goals might directly affect performance on such a task
independent of the computational capacity that can be
brought to bear to evaluate the argument. Some individuals
may put a low priority on allocating computational capacity
to evaluate the argument. Instead, for them, capacity is
engaged to assess whether the conclusion is compatible with
prior beliefs. Other individuals—of equal cognitive ability—may marshal then* cognitive resources to decouple (see
Navon, 1989a, 1989b) argument evaluation from their prior
beliefs as the instructions demand. These individuals may
easily engage in such a processing strategy because it does
not conflict with their epistemic goals. Many problems in
practical reasoning may have a similar structure (Baron,
1991, 1995; Foley, 1991; Davidson, 1995; Galotti, 1989;
Harman, 1995; Jacobs & Potenza, 1991; Kardash &
Scholes, 1996; Klaczynski & Gordon, 1996; Kuhn, 1991;
Perkins, Farady, & Bushey, 1991). Such problems—although they obviously stress algorithmic capacity to varying
degrees—might also have enormous variation in how they
engage people's goal structure. To fully understand variation in human performance on such tasks, we might need to
consider variation at the rational level as well as at the
algorithmic level of cognitive analysis.

References
Anderson, J.R. (1990). The adaptive character of thought. Hillsdale, NJ: Erlbaum.
Anderson, J. R. (1991). Is human cognition adaptive? Behavioral
and Brain Sciences, 14, 471-517.

This document is copyrighted by the American Psychological Association or one of its allied publishers.
This article is intended solely for the personal use of the individual user and is not to be disseminated broadly.

REASONING AND PRIOR BELIEF
Anderson, R. C, & Freebody, P. (1983). Reading comprehension
and the assessment and acquisition of word knowledge. In B.
Huston (Ed.), Advances in reading/language research (Vol. 2,
pp. 231-256). Greenwich, CT: JAI Press.
Audi, R. (1993a). Action, intention, and reason. Ithaca, NY: Cornell University Press.
Audi, R. (1993b). The structure of justification. Cambridge, England: Cambridge University Press.
Babad, E. (1987). Wishful thinking and objectivity among sport
fans. Social Behavior: An International Journal of Applied Social Psychology, 4, 231-240.
Babad, E., & Katz, Y. (1991). Wishful thinking—Against all odds.
Journal of Applied Social Psychology, 21, 1921-1938.
Baron, J. (1985). Rationality and intelligence. Cambridge, England: Cambridge University Press.
Baron, J. (1988). Thinking and deciding. Cambridge, England:
Cambridge University Press.
Baron, J. (1991). Beliefs about thinking. In J. Voss, D. Perkins, &
J. Segal (Eds.), Informal reasoning and education (pp. 169186). Hillsdale, NJ: Erlbaum.
Baron, J. (1993). Why teach thinking?—An essay. Applied Psychology: An International Review, 42, 191-214.
Baron, J. (1994). Nonconsequentialist decisions. Behavioral and
Brain Sciences, 17, 1-42.
Baron, J. (1995). Myside bias in thinking about abortion. Thinking
and Reasoning, 1, 221-235.
Baron, J., & Hershey, J. C. (1988). Outcome bias in decision
evaluation. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 54,
569-579.
Bell, D., Raiffa, H., & Tversky, A. (Eds.). (1988). Decision making: Descriptive, normative, and prescriptive interactions. Cambridge, England: Cambridge University Press.
Bratman, M. E., Israel, D. J., & Pollack, M. E. (1991). Plans and
resource-bounded practical reasoning. In J. Cummins & J. Pollock (Eds.), Philosophy and Al: Essays at the interface (pp.
7-22). Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Brenner, L. A., Koehler, D. J., & Tversky, A. (1996). On the
evaluation of one-sided evidence. Journal of Behavioral Decision Making, 9, 59-70.
Bronfenbrenner, U., & Ceci, S. J. (1994). Nature-nurture reconceptualized in developmental perspective: A bioecological
model. Psychological Review, 101, 568-586.
Broniarczyk, S., & Alba, J. W. (1994). Theory versus data in
prediction and correlation tasks. Organizational Behavior and
Human Decision Processes, 57, 117-139.
Brookfield, S. (1987). Developing critical thinkers. San Francisco,
CA: lossey-Bass.
Brown, J. S., Collins, A., & Duguid, P. (1989). Perspectives on
socially shared cognition. Educational Researcher, 18(1),
32-42.
Cacioppo, J. T., Petty, R. E., Feinstein, J., & Jarvis, W. (1996).
DispositJonal differences in cognitive motivation: The life and
times of individuals varying in need for cognition. Psychological
Bulletin, 119, 197-253.
Campbell, D. T. (1987). Evolutionary episternology. In G. Radnitzky & W. W. Bartley (Eds.), Evolutionary episternology, rationality, and the sociology of knowledge (pp. 47-89). La Salle,
IL: Open Court.
Carpenter, P. A., Just, M. A., & Shell, P. (1990). What one intelligence test measures: A theoretical account of the processing in
the Raven Progressive Matrices Test. Psychological Review, 97,
404-431.
Carroll, J. B. (1993). Human cognitive abilities: A survey of factor-

353

analytic studies. Cambridge, England: Cambridge University
Press.
Caryl, P. G. (1994). Early event-related potentials correlate with
inspection time and intelligence. Intelligence, 18, 15-46.
Ceci, S. J. (1990). On intelligence... more or less: A bioecological treatise on intellectual development. Englewood
Cliffs, NJ: Prentice-Hall.
Ceci, S. J. (1993). Contextual trends in intellectual development.
Developmental Review, 13, 403-435.
Cederblom, J. (1989). Willingness to reason and the identificaion
of the self. In E, Maimon, D. Nodine, & O'Conner (Eds.),
Thinking, reasoning, and writing (pp. 147-159). New York:
Longman.
Chemiak, C. (1986). Minimal rationality. Cambridge, MA: MIT
Press.
Cohen, J., & Cohen, P. (1983). Applied multiple regression/correlation analysis for the behavioral sciences (2nd ed.). Hillsdale,
NJ: Erlbaum.
Cooksey, R. W., & Freebody, P. (1987). Aspects of a computermanaged test of children's reading vocabulary: Reliability, validity, and characterization of knowledge. Reading Psychology,
8, 103-118.
Cosmides, L., & Tooby, J. (1994). Beyond intuition and instinct
blindness: Toward an evolutionarily rigorous cognitive science.
Cognition, 50, 41-77.
Cosmides, L., & Tooby, J. (1996). Are humans good intuitive
statisticians after all? Rethinking some conclusions from
the literature on judgment under uncertainty. Cognition, 58,
1-73.
Costa, P. T., & McCrae, R. R. (1992), Revised NEO personality
inventory. Odessa, FL: Psychological Assessment Resources.
Davidson, D. (1995). The representativeness heuristic and the
conjunction fallacy effect in children's decision making.
Merrill-Palmer Quarterly, 41, 328-346.
Deary, I. J. (1995). Auditory inspection time and intelligence:
What is the direction of causation? Developmental Psychology,
31, 237-250.
Deary, I. J., & Stough, C. (1996). Intelligence and inspection time.
American Psychologist, 51, 599-608.
Dennett, D. (1987). The intentional stance. Cambridge, MA: MIT
Press.
Detterman, D. K. (1994). Intelligence and the brain. In P. A. Vernon (Eds.), The neuropsychology of individual differences (pp.
35-57). San Diego, CA: Academic Press.
Donaldson. M. (1978). Children's minds. London: Fontana
Paperbacks.
Donaldson, M. (1993). Human minds: An exploration. New York:
Viking-Penguin.
Ennis, R. H. (1987). A taxonomy of critical thinking dispositions
and abilities. In J. Baron & R. Sternberg (Eds.), Teaching
thinking skills: Theory and practice (pp. 9-26). New York:
Freeman.
Ennis, R. H., & Millman, J. (1985). Cornell Critical Thinking Test.
Pacific Grove, CA: Midwest Publications.
Epstein, S. (1994). Integration of the cognitive and the psychodynamic unconscious. American Psychologist, 49, 1Q$-11A.
Epstein, S., & Meier, P. (1989). Constructive thinking: A broad
coping variable with specific components. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 57, 332-350.
Erwin, T. D. (1981). Manual for the Scale of Intellectual Development. Harrisonburg, VA: Developmental Analytics.
Erwin, T. D. (1983). The Scale of Intellectual Development: Measuring Perry's scheme. Journal of College Student Personnel,

24, 6-12.

This document is copyrighted by the American Psychological Association or one of its allied publishers.
This article is intended solely for the personal use of the individual user and is not to be disseminated broadly.

354

STANOVICH AND WEST

Estes, W. K. (1982). Learning, memory, and intelligence. In R. J.
Sternberg (Ed.), Handbook of human intelligence (pp. 170224). Cambridge, England: Cambridge University Press.
Evans, J. St. B. T. (1984). Heuristic and analytic processes in
reasoning. British Journal of Psychology, 75, 451-468.
Evans, J. St. B. T. (1989). Bias in human reasoning: Causes and
consequences. London: Erlbaum Associates.
Evans, J. St. B. T., Barston, J., & Pollard, P. (1983). On the conflict between logic and belief in syllogistic reasoning. Memory
and Cognition, U, 295-306.
Evans, J. St. B. T., Over, D. E., & Manktelow, K. (1993). Reasoning, decision making and rationality. Cognition, 49, 165-187.
Facione, P. (1992). California Critical Thinking Dispositions Inventory. La Cruz, CA: California Academic Press.
Foley, R. (1991). Rationality, belief, and commitment. Synthese,
89, 365-392.
Friedrich, J. (1993). Primary error detection and minimization
(PEDMIN) strategies in social cognition: A reinterpretation of
confirmation bias phenomena. Psychological Review, 100,
298-319.
Furnham, A. (1986). Response bias, social desirability and dissimulation. Personality and Individual Differences, 7, 385-400.
Galotti, K. (1989). Approaches to studying formal and everyday
reasoning. Psychological Bulletin, 105, 331-351.
Gauthier, D. (1986). Morals by agreement. Oxford, England: Oxford University Press.
Gibbard, A. (1990). Wise choices, apt feelings: A theory of normative judgment. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.
Goff, M., & Ackerman, P. L. (1992). Personality-intelligence relations: Assessment of typical intellectual engagement. Journal
of Educational Psychology, 84, 537-552.
Goldman, A. I. (1978). Epistemics: The regulative theory of cognition. Journal of Philosophy, 55, 509-523.
Goldman, A. I. (1986). Epistemology and cognition. Cambridge,
MA: Harvard University Press.
Granberg, D., & Brent, E. (1983). When prophecy bends: The
preference-expectation link in the U.S. presidential elections,
1952-1980. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 45,
477-491.
Harman, G. (1986). Change in view. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Harman, G. (1995). Rationality. In E. E. Smith & D. N. Osherson
(Eds.), Thinking (Vol 3, pp. 175-211). Cambridge, MA: MIT
Press.
Hunt, E. (1978). Mechanics of verbal ability. Psychological Review, 85, 109-130.
Hunt, E. (1987). The next word on verbal ability. In P. A. Vernon
(Ed.), Speed of information-processing and intelligence (pp.
347-392). Norwood, NJ: Ablex.
Jacobs, J. E., & Potenza, M. (1991). The use of judgment heuristics to make social and object decisions: A developmental perspective. Child Development, 62, 166-178.
Kardash, C. M., & Scholes, R. J. (1996). Effects of pre-existing
beliefs, epistemological beliefs, and need for cognition on interpretation of controversial issues. Journal of Educational Psy-

chology, 88, 260-271.
Keating, D. P. (1990). Charting pathways to the development of
expertise. Educational Psychologist, 25, 243-267.
Kerlinger, F. N., & Pedhazur, E. J. (1973). Multiple regression in
behavioral research. New York: Holt, Rinehart & Winston.
King, P. M., & Kitchener, K. S. (1994). Developing reflective
judgment. San Francisco: Jossey-Bass.
Kitchener, K., & Fischer, K. W. (1990). A skill approach to the
development of reflective thinking- In D. Kuhn (Eds.), Devel-

opmental perspectives on teaching and learning thinking skills
(pp. 48-62). Basel, Switzerland: Karger.
Kitcher, P. (1993). The advancement of science. New York: Oxford University Press.
Klaczynski, P. A. (1997). Bias in adolescents' everyday reasoning
and its relationship with intellectual ability, personal theories,
and self-serving motivation. Developmental Psychology, 33,
273-283.
Klaczynski, P. A., & Gordon, D. H. (1996). Self-serving influences on adolescents' evaluations of belief-relevant evidence.
Journal of Experimental Child Psychology, 62, 317-339.
Koehler, J. J. (1993). The influence of prior beliefs on scientific
judgments of evidence quality. Organizational Behavior and
Human Decision Processes, 56, 28-55.
Kornblith, H. (1993). Inductive inference and its natural ground.
Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Kramer, D. A., Kahlbaugh, P., & Goldston, R. (1992). A measure
of paradigm beliefs about the social world. Journal of Gerontology: Psychological Sciences, 47, P180-P189.
Kruglanski, A. W. (1989). Lay epistemics and human knowledge:
Cognitive and motivational bases. New York: Plenum Press.
Kruglanski, A. W., & Webster, D. M. (1996). Motivated closing
the mind: "Seizing" and "freezing." Psychological Review, 103,
263-283.
Kuhn, D. (1991). The skills of argument. Cambridge, England:
Cambridge University Press.
Kuhn, D. (1993). Connecting scientific and informal reasoning.
Merrill-Palmer Quarterly, 38, 74-103.
Kuhn, D., Amsel, E,, & O'Loughlin, M. (1988). The development
of scientific thinking skills. San Diego, CA: Academic Press.
Kunda, Z. (1990). The case for motivated reasoning. Psychological Bulletin, 108, 480-498.
Lave, J., & Wenger, E. (1991). Situated learning: Legitimate
peripheral participation. Cambridge, England: Cambridge University Press.
Lipman, M. (1991). Thinking in education. Cambridge, England:
Cambridge University Press.
Lohman, D. F. (1989). Human intelligence: An introduction to
advances in theory and research. Review of Educational Research, 59, 333-373.
Lord, C. G., Lepper, M. R., & Preston, E. (1984). Considering the
opposite: A corrective strategy for social judgment. Journal of
Personality and Social Psychology, 47, 1231-1243.
Luria, A. R. (1976). Cognitive development: Its cultural and social
foundations. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.
Markovits, H., & Nantel, G. (1989). The belief-bias effect in the
production and evaluation of logical conclusions. Memory and
Cognition, 17, 11-17.
Marr, D. (1982). Vision. San Francisco: Freeman.
Matarazzo, J. D. (1972). Wechsler's measurement and appraisal of
adult intelligence (5th ed.). Baltimore: Williams & Wilkins.
Moshrnan, D. (1994). Reasoning, metareasoning, and the promotion of rationality. In A. Demetriou & A. Bfklides (Eds.), Intelligence, mind, and reasoning: Structure and development (pp.
135-150). Amsterdam: Elsevier.
Navon, D. (1989a). The importance of being visible: On the role of
attention in a mind viewed as an anarchic intelligence system: I.
Basic tenets. European Journal of Cognitive Psychology, 1,
191-213.
Navon, D. (1989b). The importance of being visible: On the role
of attention in a mind viewed as an anarchic intelligence system:
II. Application to the field of attention. European Journal of
Cognitive Psychology, 1, 215-238.

This document is copyrighted by the American Psychological Association or one of its allied publishers.
This article is intended solely for the personal use of the individual user and is not to be disseminated broadly.

REASONING AND PRIOR BELIEF
Neimark, E. (1987). Adventures in thinking. San Diego, CA:
Harcourt Brace Jovanovich.
Newell, A. (1982). The knowledge level. Artificial Intelligence,
18, 87-127.
Newell, A. (1990). Unified theories of cognition. Cambridge, MA:
Harvard University Press.
Nickerson, R. (1987). Why teach thinking? In J. Baron & R.
Sternberg (Eds.), Teaching thinking skills: Theory and practice
(pp. 27-40). New York: Freeman.
Norman, D. A. (1976). Memory and attention: An introduction to
human information processing, (2nd ed.). New York: Wiley.
Norris, S. P. (1992). Testing for the disposition to think critically.
Informal Logic, 14, 157-164.
Norris, S. P., & Ennis, R. H. (1989). Evaluating critical thinking.
Pacific Grove, CA: Midwest Publications.
Nozick, R. (1993). The nature of rationality. Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press.
Oakhill, J., Johnson-Laird, P. N., & Garnham, A. (1989). Believability and syllogistic reasoning. Cognition, 31, 117-140.
Oaksford, M., & Chater, N. (1993). Reasoning theories and
bounded rationality. In K. Manktelow & D. Over (Eds.), Rationality: Psychological and philosophical perspectives (pp. 3 1 60). London: Routledge.
Oaksford, M , & Chater, N. (1994). A rational analysis of the
selection task as optimal data selection. Psychological Review,
101, 608-631.
Oaksford, M., & Chater, N. (1995). Theories of reasoning and the
computational explanation of everyday inference. Thinking and
Reasoning, 1, 121-152.
Olson, D. R. (1977). From utterance to text: The bias of language
in speech and writing. Harvard Educational Review, 47,
257-281.
Olson, D. R. (1986). The cognitive consequences of literacy. Canadian Psychology, 27, 109-121.
Olson, D. R. (1994). The world on paper. Cambridge, England:
Cambridge University Press.
Paulhus, D. L. (1991). Measurement and control of response bias.
In J. P. Robinson, P. Shaver, & L. S. Wrightsman (Eds.), Measures of personality and social psychological attitudes (pp.
17-59). San Diego, CA: Academic Press.
Paulhus, D. L., & Reid, D. B. (1991). Enhancement and denial in
socially desirable responding. Journal of Personality and Social
Psychology, 60, 307-317.
Perkins, D. N. (1995). Outsmarting 1Q: The emerging science of
learnable intelligence. New York: Free Press.
Perkins, D. N., Farady, M., & Bushey, B. (1991). Everyday reasoning and the roots of intelligence. In J. Voss, D. Perkins, & J.
Segal (Eds.), Informal reasoning and education (pp. 83-105).
Hillsdale, NJ: Eribaum.
Perkins, D. N., Jay, E., & Tishman, S. (1993). Beyond abilities: A
dispositional theory of thinking. Merrill-Palmer Quarterly, 39,
1-21.
Perry, W. G. (1970). Forms of intellectual and ethical development
in the college years: A scheme. New York: Holt, Rinehart &
Winston.
Piaget, J. (1926). The language and thought of the child. London:
Routledge & Kegan Paul.
Piaget, J. (1972). Intellectual evolution from adolescence to adulthood. Human Development, 15, 1-12.
Pintrich, P. R., Marx, R., & Boyle, R. (1993). Beyond cold conceptual change: The role of motivational beliefs and classroom
contextual factors in the process of conceptual change. Review of
Educational Research, 63, 167-199.

355

Pylyshyn, Z. (1984). Computation and cognition. Cambridge, MA:
MIT Press.
Pyszczynski, T., & Greenberg, J. (1987). Toward an integration of
cognitive and motivational perspectives on social inference: A
biased hypothesis-testing model. In L. Berkowitz (Ed.), Advances in experimental social psychology (pp. 297-340). San
Diego, CA: Academic Press.
Robinson, J. P., Shaver, P. R., & Wrightsman, L. S. (1991). Measures of personality and social psychological attitudes (Vol. 1,
pp. 560-564). San Diego, CA: Academic Press.
Rogoff, B., & Lave, J. (Eds.). (1984). Everyday cognition. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.
Rokeach, M. (1960). The open and closed mind. New York: Basic
Books.
Schoemaker, P. (1991). The quest for optimality: A positive heuristic of science? Behavioral and Brain Sciences, 14, 205-245.
Schommer, M. (1990). Effects of beliefs about the nature of
knowledge on comprehension. Journal of Educational Psychology, 82, 498-504.
Schommer, M. (1993). Epistemological development and academic performance among secondary students. Journal of Educational Psychology, 85, 406-411.
Schommer, M. (1994). Synthesizing epistemological belief research: Tentative understandings and provocative confusions.
Educational Psychology Review, 6, 293-319.
Schommer, MM & Walker, K. (1995). Are epistemological beliefs
similar across domains? Journal of Educational Psychology, 87,
424-432.
Siegel, H. (1993). Not by skill alone: The centrality of character to
critical thinking. Informal Logic, 15, 163-177.
Slusher, M. P., & Anderson, C. A. (1996). Using causal persuasive
arguments to change beliefs and teach new information: The
mediating role of explanation availability and evaluation bias in
the acceptance of knowledge. Journal of Educational Psychology, 88, 110-122.
Snodgrass, J. G., & Corwin, J. (1988). Pragmatics of measuring
recognition memory: Applications to dementia and amnesia.
Journal of Experimental Psychology: General, 117, 34-50.
Stanovich, K. E. (1989). Implicit philosophies of mind: The Dualism Scale and its relationships with religiosity and belief in
extrasensory perception. Journal of Psychology, 123, 5-23.
Stanovich, K. E. (1994). Reconceptualizing intelligence: Dysrationalia as an intuition pump. Educational Researcher, 23(4),
U-22.
Stanovich, K. E. (in press). Variable rationality. Mahweh, NJ:
Eribaum.
Sternberg, R.J., & Ruzgis, P. (Eds.). (1994). Personality and
intelligence. Cambridge, England: Cambridge University Press.
Straughn, C. S., & Straughn, B.L. (Eds.). (1995). Lovejoy's college guide (23rd ed.). New York: Simon & Schuster.
Thagard, P. (1992). Conceptual revolutions. Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press.
Tobacyk, J., & Milford, G. (1983). Belief in paranormal phenomena. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 44,
1029-1037.
Troldahl, V., & Powell, F. (1965). A short-form dogmatism scale
for use in field studies. Social Forces, 44, 211-215.
Vernon, P. A. (1991). The use of biological measures to estimate
behavioral intelligence. Educational Psychologist, 25, 293304.
Vernon, P. A. (1993). Biological approaches to the study of human
intelligence. Norwood, NJ: Ablex.
Vernon, P, A., & Mori, M. (1992). Intelligence, reaction times, and

356

STANOVICH AND WEST

peripheral nerve conduction velocity. Intelligence, 16, 273-288.
Voss, J., Perkins, D. & Segal, J. (Eds.)- (1991). Informal reasoning
and education. Hillsdale, NJ: Erlbaum.
Wade, C , & Tavris, C. (1993). Critical and creative thinking. New
York: Harper Collins.
Watson, G., & Glaser, E.M. (1980). Watson-Glaser Critical
Thinking Appraisal. New York: Psychological Corporation.
Webster, D.M., & Kruglanski, A.W. (1994). Individual differences in need for cognitive closure. Journal of Personality and
Social Psychology, 67, 1049-1062.
West, R. F., & Stanovich, K. E. (1991). The incidental acquisition
of information from reading. Psychological Science, 2, 325-330.

White, T.G., Slater, W.H., & Graves, M.F. (1989). Yes/no
method of vocabulary assessment: Valid for whom and useful
for what? In S. McCormick & J. Zutell (Eds.), Cognitive and
social perspectives for literacy research and instruction (38th
yearbook of the National Reading Conference, pp. 391-397).
Chicago, IL: National Reading Conference.
Zechmeister, E. B., & Johnson, J. (1992). Critical thinking: A
functional approach. Pacific Grove, CA: Brooks/Cole.
Zimmerman, J., Broder, P. K., Shaughnessy, J. J., & Underwood,
B. J. (1977). A recognition test of vocabulary using signaldetection measures, and some correlates of word and nonword
recognition. Intelligence, 1, 5-31.

This document is copyrighted by the American Psychological Association or one of its allied publishers.
This article is intended solely for the personal use of the individual user and is not to be disseminated broadly.

Appendix A
Examples of Items on the Argument Evaluation Test
Instructions: We are interested in your ability to evaluate counterarguments. First, you will be presented with a belief held by an
individual named Dale. Following this, you will be presented with
Dale's premise or justification for holding this particular belief. A
Critic will then offer a counter-argument to Dale's justification for
the belief. (We will assume that the Critic's statement is factually
correct.) Finally, Dale will offer a rebuttal to the Critic's counterargument. (We will assume that Dale's rebuttal is also factually
correct.) You are to evaluate the strength of Dale's rebuttal to the
Critic's counter-argument, regardless of your feeling about the
original belief or Dale's premise.

tributed to the system before they die (assume statement factually
correct).
Dale's rebuttal to Critic's counter-argument: These figures don't
take into account the fact that retirees are being paid in dollars that
have been greatly eroded over the years due to inflation (assume
statement factually correct).
Indicate the strength of Dale's rebuttal to the Critic's counterargument:
1 = Very Weak 2 = Weak 3 = Strong 4 = Very Strong

Dale's belief: The national debt should be reduced by cutting
Congressional salaries.

Median experts' evaluation (Argument Quality): 3.0

Dale's premise or justification for belief: Congressional salaries
are very high, and cutting them would make a significant step
towards paying off the huge national debt.

Mean rebuttal evaluation across participants (Argument Evaluation): 2.89

Critic's counter-argument: The national debt is so large that
totally eliminating all Congressional salaries would still hardly
make a dent in it (assume statement factually correct).

Dale's belief: Students should have a stronger voice than the
general public in setting university policies.

Dale's rebuttal to Critic's counter-argument: The members of
Congress, whose actions are to a considerable extent responsible
for the huge national debt, earn salaries several times higher than
the national average (assume statement factually correct).
Indicate the strength of Dale's rebuttal to the Critic's counterargument:
1 = Very Weak 2 = Weak 3 = Strong 4 - Very Strong
Median experts' evaluation (Argument Quality): 1.0
Mean item agreement across participants (Prior Belief): 3.00
Mean rebuttal evaluation across participants (Argument Evaluation): 2.70
Dale's belief: The present Social Security system is unfair to
people who are now retired.
Dale's premise or justification for belief: The present Social
Security system is unfair to retired people because these people get
far too little money.
Critic's counter-argument: Currently, retirees are drawing
from the Social Security system over four times what they con-

Mean item agreement across participants (Prior Belief): 2.36

Dale's premise or justification for belief: Because students are the
ones who must ultimately pay the costs of running the university
through tuition, they should have a stronger voice in setting university policies.
Critic's counter-argument: Tuition covers less than one half the
cost of an education at most state universities (assume statement
factually correct), so the taxpayers should have a stronger say in
the policies.
Dale's rebuttal to Critic's counter-argument: Because it is the
students who are directly influenced by university policies (assume
statement factually correct), they are the ones who should have the
stronger voice.
Indicate the strength of Dale's rebuttal to the Critic's counterargument:
1 = Very Weak 2 = Weak 3 = Strong 4 = Very Strong
Median experts' evaluation (Argument Quality): 1.0
Mean item agreement across participants (Prior Belief): 3.32
Mean rebuttal evaluation across participants (Argument Evaluation): 3.11

REASONING AND PRIOR BELIEF

357

Appendix B
Intercorrelations Among the Primary Variables
1
2
3
4
5
—
1. Flexible thinking
2. Openness-ideas
.36
__
3. Openness-values
.36
.40
—
4. Absolutism
-.37
-.39
-.59
—
-.22
-.54
5. Dogmatism
-.19
.55
~
6. Categorical thinking
-.31
-.31
-.58
.57
.54
7. Superstitious thinking
-.26
-.13
-.13
.23
.19
8. Counterfactual thinking
.06
-.02
.09 --.09
-.15
Note. Correlations larger than .]11 are significant at the .05 level (two-tailed).
This document is copyrighted by the American Psychological Association or one of its allied publishers.
This article is intended solely for the personal use of the individual user and is not to be disseminated broadly.

Variable

*

6

7

—
.28
-.08

—
.01

Appendix C

Component Loadings for All Variables After Varimax Rotation
Component
Variable

l

Flexible thinking
.566
Openness-ideas
.568
Openness-values
.805
Absolutism
.816
Dogmatism
.721
Categorical thinking
.790
Superstitious thinking
-.379
Counterfactual thinking
—
% variance accounted for
40.8
Note. Component loadings lower than .350 have been eliminated.

2
-.369
-.355
—
—
—
—
.381
.735
13.5

Received March 15, 1996
Revision received July 16, 1996
Accepted August 28, 1996

