This article was downloaded by: [New York University]
On: 25 June 2015, At: 04:28
Publisher: Routledge
Informa Ltd Registered in England and Wales Registered Number: 1072954 Registered office: Mortimer House,
37-41 Mortimer Street, London W1T 3JH, UK

Psychological Inquiry: An International Journal for the
Advancement of Psychological Theory
Publication details, including instructions for authors and subscription information:
http://www.tandfonline.com/loi/hpli20

TARGET ARTICLE: "Putting the Self Into Self-Conscious
Emotions: A Theoretical Model"
Jessica L. Tracy & Richard W. Robins
Published online: 19 Nov 2009.

To cite this article: Jessica L. Tracy & Richard W. Robins (2004) TARGET ARTICLE: "Putting the Self Into Self-Conscious
Emotions: A Theoretical Model", Psychological Inquiry: An International Journal for the Advancement of Psychological Theory,
15:2, 103-125, DOI: 10.1207/s15327965pli1502_01
To link to this article: http://dx.doi.org/10.1207/s15327965pli1502_01

PLEASE SCROLL DOWN FOR ARTICLE
Taylor & Francis makes every effort to ensure the accuracy of all the information (the “Content”) contained
in the publications on our platform. However, Taylor & Francis, our agents, and our licensors make no
representations or warranties whatsoever as to the accuracy, completeness, or suitability for any purpose of the
Content. Any opinions and views expressed in this publication are the opinions and views of the authors, and
are not the views of or endorsed by Taylor & Francis. The accuracy of the Content should not be relied upon and
should be independently verified with primary sources of information. Taylor and Francis shall not be liable for
any losses, actions, claims, proceedings, demands, costs, expenses, damages, and other liabilities whatsoever
or howsoever caused arising directly or indirectly in connection with, in relation to or arising out of the use of
the Content.
This article may be used for research, teaching, and private study purposes. Any substantial or systematic
reproduction, redistribution, reselling, loan, sub-licensing, systematic supply, or distribution in any
form to anyone is expressly forbidden. Terms & Conditions of access and use can be found at http://
www.tandfonline.com/page/terms-and-conditions

Psychological Inquiry
2004, Vol. 15, No. 2, 103–125

Copyright © 2004 by
Lawrence Erlbaum Associates, Inc.

TARGET ARTICLE

Putting the Self Into Self-Conscious Emotions: A Theoretical Model
Jessica L. Tracy and Richard W. Robins

Downloaded by [New York University] at 04:28 25 June 2015

Department of Psychology
University of California, Davis
Self-conscious emotions (e.g., shame, pride) are fundamentally important to a wide
range of psychological processes, yet they have received relatively little attention
compared to other, more “basic” emotions (e.g., sadness, joy). This article outlines
the unique features that distinguish self-conscious from basic emotions and then explains why generally accepted models of basic emotions do not adequately capture the
self-conscious emotion process. The authors present a new model of self-conscious
emotions, specify a set of predictions derived from the model, and apply the model to
narcissistic self-esteem regulation. Finally, the authors discuss the model’s broader
implications for future research on self and emotion.
Willy Loman, the protagonist of Arthur Miller’s
Death of a Salesman, experiences such profound
shame from failing to achieve the American dream that
he commits suicide by the final act of the play. In William Shakespeare’s Macbeth, Lady Macbeth is so
overwhelmed by guilt after murdering her king, she
hallucinates spots of blood on her hands and takes her
own life. Oedipus, the tragic hero of Sophocles’
Oedipus Rex, is plunged into epic shame when he realizes that he killed his father and married his mother.
Oedipus refrains from suicide but stabs out his eyes so
he will never have to look himself, or others, in the face
again. And in Ovid’s Metamorphoses, the infamous
Narcissus is so consumed by pride that he chooses eternal self-reflection over the possibility of a meaningful
romantic relationship.
As these four stories illustrate, self-conscious emotions, such as shame, guilt, and pride, play a central
role in motivating and regulating people’s thoughts,
feelings, and behaviors (Campos, 1995; Fischer &
Tangney, 1995). Self-conscious emotions drive people
to work hard in achievement and task domains (Stipek,
1995; Weiner, 1985), and to behave in moral, socially
appropriate ways in their social interactions and intimate relationships (Baumeister, Stillwell, & Heatherton, 1994; Leith & Baumeister, 1998; Retzinger,
1987). Most people spend a great deal of time avoiding
social approbation, a strong elicitor of shame and embarrassment. We worry about losing social status in the
eyes of others and, as Goffman (1955) noted, our every
social act is influenced by even the slight chance of
public shame or loss of face. In fact, according to the

Cooley–Scheff Conjecture, we are “virtually always in
a state of either pride or shame” (Scheff, 1988, p. 399).
Researchers have linked self-conscious emotions to
a wide variety of outcomes. Guilt, for example, has
been found to be centrally involved in reparative and
prosocial behaviors such as empathy, altruism, and
caregiving (e.g., Batson, 1987; Baumeister et al., 1994;
Tangney & Dearing, 2002). Shame has been shown to
mediate the negative emotional and physical health
consequences of social stigma; victims of physical
abuse (Feiring, Taska, & Lewis, 2002) and HIV-positive men (Kemeny, 2002) suffer poorer emotional and
physical health if they feel ashamed of their stigma.
Shame is also associated with depression and chronic
anger (Harder, Cutler, & Rockart, 1992; Lewis, 1971;
Tangney, Miller, Flicker, & Barlow, 1996; Tangney,
Wagner, & Gramzow, 1992) and is a core component
of the narcissistic, antisocial, and borderline personality disorders (see Harder, 1995, for review).
Despite their centrality to psychological functioning, self-conscious emotions have received considerably less attention from emotion researchers than the so
called basic emotions such as joy, fear, and sadness
1
(Campos, 1995; Fischer & Tangney, 1995). Over the
1

Although Ortony and Turner (1990) argued against the usefulness of the basic emotion concept, their position was refuted by
Ekman (1992a), Izard (1992), and Panksepp (1992), all of whom
pointed to the extensive empirical evidence supporting the concept.
Regardless of this debate, the underlying theoretical notion that a relatively small subset of emotions holds a special status because of
their biological and psychological importance is unquestionably a
central concept in the current emotion literature. Its continued impor-

Downloaded by [New York University] at 04:28 25 June 2015

TRACY & ROBINS

past couple of decades, the field of emotion research has
expanded dramatically (Hébert, 2002), exemplified by
the new area of “affective science” and the emergence of
a new APA journal, Emotion, in 2001. However, the increase in emotion research as a whole has not been
mirrored by a corresponding increase in research on
self-conscious emotions, despite the call of psychologists such as Fischer and Tangney (1995). In fact, of the
66 articles published to date in Emotion, only two have
discussed self-conscious emotions, and in neither case
are these emotions the focus of the article.
There are both theoretical and methodological reasons for the lack of research on self-conscious emotions. In the emotion literature, researchers have
focused on emotions that are biologically based,
shared with other animals, pan-culturally experienced,
and identifiable via discrete, universally recognized facial expressions—in other words, emotions that can be
studied without reliance on verbal reports of internal
experience (e.g., Davidson, 2001; Ekman, Levenson,
& Friesen, 1983; LeDoux, 1996; Panksepp, 1998).
From this perspective, only a small subset of the vast
number of emotions represented in the natural language—anger, fear, disgust, sadness, happiness, and
surprise—are considered important (Ekman, 1992b;
Izard, 1971). These six have been labeled “basic” emotions because of their biological basis, evolved origins,
universality, and location (in most cases) at the basic
level in a hierarchical classification of emotion terms
(Johnson-Laird & Oatley, 1989; Shaver, Schwartz,
Kirson, & O’Connor, 1987). Self-conscious emotions,
in contrast, show weaker evidence of universality:
Their antecedents, phenomenological experience, and
consequences differ across cultures (Eid & Diener,
2001; Kitayama, Markus, & Matsumoto, 1995; Menon
& Shweder, 1994), and there is less evidence that they
have pan-culturally recognized facial expressions
(Ekman, 1992b). Moreover, self-conscious emotions
are subsumed by basic emotions in linguistic hierarchical classifications (e.g., sadness subsumes shame, joy
subsumes pride; Shaver et al., 1987).
Researchers interested in the self have also paid relatively little attention to self-conscious emotions, focusing instead on the broad dimensions of positive and
negative affect. Although affective processes are invoked to explain a wide range of findings in the self literature, specific emotions—self-conscious or
basic—are rarely assessed or incorporated into theoretical models. For example, in discussing self-esteem
maintenance, Tesser (2001) argued that “many self-de-

tance is exemplified by a recent debate in the APA journal Emotion
about which emotional states should be included within the basic
emotion category (e.g., Rozin & Cohen, 2003). In fact, Rozin and Cohen (2003) opened their target article with the statement, “There is
much evidence suggesting that there is a set of basic emotions, as defined and evidenced by a number of investigators” (p. 68).

104

fense mechanisms are mediated by affect” (p. 68), but
did not specify which particular emotions are involved.
Carver and Scheier (1998) proposed that movement toward a self-regulatory goal (i.e., reduction of a discrepancy) produces a generalized feeling of positive affect
whereas movement away from a self-regulatory goal
produces negative affect. In our own research, we have
argued that self-enhancement biases temporarily increase positive affect, but we also failed to specify the
precise emotions experienced by self-enhancers
(Robins & Beer, 2001). Given the lack of emphasis on
any specific emotions, it is not surprising that self-conscious emotions have received so little attention in the
self literature. Nonetheless, we believe that specific
self-conscious emotions are critically involved in
many of these findings. For example, self-enhancement processes may be driven by the desire to promote
feelings of pride and avoid feelings of shame.
Aside from these theoretical issues, methodological
roadblocks have also hindered research on self-conscious emotions (Lewis, Sullivan, Stanger, & Weiss,
1989). Self-conscious emotions (with the possible exception of embarrassment) may be more difficult to
elicit in the laboratory than basic emotions, such as
fear, disgust, and joy. Experimental procedures used to
elicit basic emotions (e.g., photographs, film clips)
seem less effective in eliciting self-conscious emotions. Indeed, it is difficult to imagine an ethical manipulation that would generate shame in all
individuals, partly because self-conscious emotions require more psychologically complex and individualized elicitors. Furthermore, even if self-conscious
emotions could be effectively elicited, it might be more
difficult to measure the resultant emotional experiences. Tangney and her colleagues have developed reliable self-report measures of self-conscious emotional
dispositions (e.g., the Test of Self-Conscious Affect-3;
Tangney, Dearing, Wagner, & Gramzow, 2000), however standardized procedures for assessing on-line
self-conscious emotions from nonverbal behaviors are
only beginning to be developed (Keltner, 1995; Tracy
& Robins, 2004b). In contrast, there are a variety of
coding schemes for assessing dispositional and on-line
basic emotions through verbal and nonverbal behaviors, such as the Emotion-Facial Action Coding System (EM-FACS) for coding facial expressions (Ekman
& Rosenberg, 1997).
Although the historical emphasis on basic emotions
is understandable, we believe the time is ripe to devote
greater attention to self-conscious emotions. The theoretical and methodological lessons learned from the
study of basic emotions can be applied in research on
the more psychologically complex self-conscious
emotions. A better understanding of the antecedents
and dynamics of self-conscious emotions will provide
insights into the mechanisms underlying a wide range
of psychological phenomena. Moreover, regardless of

Downloaded by [New York University] at 04:28 25 June 2015

TARGET ARTICLE

whether self-conscious emotions are universal and
have clear-cut neurobiological bases, if an individual
subjectively feels ashamed, guilty, embarrassed, or
proud, then that, in itself, is an important psychological
event with implications for future behavior, decisions,
and mental and physical health. Finally, the methodological impediments to the study of self-conscious
emotions are not intractable. Indeed, similar issues
were raised several decades ago, when many psychologists argued that emotions in general could not be studied scientifically. A handful of emotion researchers
questioned this claim and struggled against the zeitgeist to develop the field of affective science. We believe it is time to approach the study of self-conscious
emotions in the same systematic and comprehensive
manner.
In fact, it is already clear from the extant research
that the study of self-conscious emotions can be fruitful. The few researchers who have studied self-conscious emotions have made great progress toward
understanding their development, expressions, functions, and consequences (e.g., Fischer & Tangney,
1995; Keltner & Buswell, 1997; Lewis, 2000;
Lindsay-Hartz, 1984; Miller, 1995; Stipek, 1983;
Tangney & Dearing, 2002). However, there is little
empirical research on the antecedent cognitive processes that generate self-conscious emotions (but see
Keltner & Buswell, 1996; Tangney et al., 1996;
Weiner, 1985). Appraisal theorists, who have extensively tested their models of the cognitive processes
thought to elicit the whole range of emotions, typically
pay little attention to the family of self-conscious emotions in particular (e.g., Lazarus, 1991; Roseman,
1991; Scherer, 2001).
In our view, self-conscious emotions need to be
treated as a special class of emotions. As cognition-dependent emotions (Izard, Ackerman, & Schultz, 1999),
self-conscious emotions require a distinct theoretical
model specifying their antecedent cognitions. The absence of such a model may have impeded self-conscious emotion research and contributed to the relative
neglect of these emotions. As Levenson (1999) noted,
“What is needed is not a single theory of emotion, but
rather a set of emotion theories for different families of
emotions [including] one for the self-conscious emotions” (p. 493).
In the following section, we describe the unique set
of features that distinguish self-conscious from basic
emotions. We then explain why generally accepted
models of basic emotions do not adequately capture
the self-conscious emotion process. We next present a
new appraisal-based model of self-conscious emotions
and demonstrate the model’s utility by applying it to
narcissistic self-esteem regulation. Finally, we conclude by discussing the model’s broader implications
for research on self and emotion. We hope this article
will stimulate theory and research on self-conscious

emotions and will remind psychologists that when it
comes to motivating complex human behaviors,
self-conscious emotions are perhaps the most basic.

Distinctive Features of Self-Conscious
Emotions

Self-Conscious Emotions Require
Self-Awareness and Self-Representations
First and foremost, self-conscious emotions differ
from basic emotions because they require self-awareness and self-representations. Although basic emotions such as fear and sadness can and often do involve
self-evaluative processes, only self-conscious emotions must involve these processes (Buss, 2001; Lewis
et al., 1989; Tangney & Dearing, 2002). A sense of
self, as conceived by self theorists since James (1890),
includes an ongoing sense of self-awareness (the “I”
self) and the capacity for complex self-representations
(the “me” self, or the mental representations that constitute one’s identity). Together, these self-processes
make it possible for self-evaluations, and therefore
self-conscious emotions, to occur.
As we will explain in greater detail below, people
tend to experience self-conscious emotions, such as
pride and shame, only when they become aware that
they have lived up to, or failed to live up to, some actual or ideal self-representation. Events that do not activate self-evaluative processes may generate basic,
but not self-conscious, emotions. For example, a person may feel great happiness after winning either the
lottery or an athletic event. Presumably, the former
event would not involve any self-evaluation, whereas
the latter would elicit a self-evaluative process (e.g.,
“What does my athletic achievement mean for my talents and abilities?”). As a result, only the latter
event—success in athletics—would also generate a
self-conscious emotion, such as pride (unless the person takes personal credit for having chosen the winning lottery numbers). Consistent with this account,
comparative studies suggest that animals who likely
lack the capacity for self-awareness do not experience
self-conscious emotions, whereas animals who may be
self-aware (e.g., chimpanzees and orangutans) display
emotional reactions that can be interpreted as pride,
shame, and embarrassment (Hart & Karmel, 1996;
Hayes, 1951; Russon & Galdikas, 1993; Yerkes &
Yerkes, 1929). Thus, the primary distinctive characteristic of self-conscious emotions is that their elicitation
requires the ability to form stable self-representations
(me), to focus attention on those representations (i.e.,
to self-reflect; I), and to put it all together to generate a
self-evaluation.
Importantly,
these
same
self-evaluative processes can also lead to the experi105

TRACY & ROBINS

ence of basic emotions; however, unlike self-conscious emotions, basic emotions can also be elicited in
the absence of self-evaluation.

Downloaded by [New York University] at 04:28 25 June 2015

Self-Conscious Emotions Emerge
Later in Childhood Than Basic
Emotions
A second distinctive feature of self-conscious emotions is that they develop later than basic emotions
(Izard, 1971). Previous research suggests that most basic emotions emerge within the first 9 months of life
(e.g., Campos, Barrett, Lamb, Goldsmith, & Stenberg,
1983); in fact, the primacy of these emotions in ontogeny is one reason for their classification as basic (Izard,
1992). In contrast, even generalized feelings of
self-consciousness (typically labeled as an early form
of embarrassment) do not develop until around 18 to
24 months (Lewis, 1995). More complex self-conscious emotions, such as shame, guilt, and pride,
emerge even later, possibly by the end of the child’s
third year of life (Izard et al., 1999; Lewis, 1995;
Lewis, Alessandri, & Sullivan, 1992; Stipek, 1995).2
One explanation that researchers have proffered for
the later development of self-conscious emotions is
that they require the capacity for self-awareness and
the formation of stable self-representations (Lewis,
1995; Tangney & Dearing, 2002). Supporting this assumption, self-awareness develops around 18 to 24
months, the same age that the first self-conscious emotion makes its appearance (Hart & Karmel, 1996;
Lewis et al., 1992). Moreover, Kochanska, Gross, Lin,
and Nichols (2002) found that children who showed
early “signs of self” (including mirror self-recognition
and verbal self-description) at 18 months were more
likely to show behavioral displays of a self-conscious
emotion (guilt) following a mishap (e.g., breaking a
toy) at 33 months.
Self-conscious emotions may also emerge later because children must first come to understand that particular rules and standards determine what is
appropriate social behavior, and that their own behavior will be evaluated by others according to these standards (Lewis, 2000; Lewis et al., 1989; Stipek, 1983).
Eventually, as children come to develop an elaborated
theory of mind, they learn that significant others, most
often parents or caregivers, view them from an exter2

Of course such studies are complicated by the difficulty of assessing discrete emotions in infants and young children, and it is possible
that the apparent age difference in the emergence of basic versus
self-conscious emotions reflects the inability of researchers to assess
self-conscious emotions at an early age. However, in these developmental studies, self-conscious emotions are assessed through behaviors such as gaze aversion (e.g., shame) and expanded posture and
raised arms (pride; Lewis et al., 1992), which are relatively easy to
code in young children.

106

nal, evaluative perspective (Cooley, 1902; Wellman &
Lagattuta, 2000). External evaluations (e.g., “Mommy
gets mad when I spill milk”) can be internalized when
the child develops the capacity for self-awareness and
then transformed into the stable self-evaluations (e.g.,
“I am bad when I spill milk”) essential for self-conscious emotions (Retzinger, 1987; Schore, 1998). Consistent with this developmental account, as children
grow older they come to depend less on external standards and more on their own, internalized norms for
judging behavior. For example, when younger children discuss their shame and guilt experiences they focus on the reactions of others (e.g., “I am afraid that
others won’t like me anymore”), but older children
tend to use their own standards to make self-evaluations (e.g., “I feel stupid”; Ferguson, Stegge, &
Damhuis, 1991).

Self-Conscious Emotions Serve
Primarily Socialized Needs
Emotions are likely to have evolved through natural
selection to serve two primary kinds of functions—promoting the direct attainment of survival and
reproductive goals (which we will refer to as survival
goals) and promoting the attainment of social goals
(e.g., getting along and getting ahead), which are more
distally related to survival and reproduction. As social
creatures, social goals are probably essential for our
survival, but their attainment represents a more intermediary step toward adaptive fitness than the direct attainment of survival goals; for example, the social goal
of befriending a future ally is a more intermediary step
toward survival than fleeing a predator. Basic emotions clearly serve survival and social functions. For
example, fear may cause an individual to run away
from danger, thereby enhancing his or her chances for
survival; but fear (e.g., of social scorn) may also cause
an individual to act in a socially appropriate manner,
thereby enhancing his or her ability to meet social
goals of getting along with others.
In contrast, self-conscious emotions seem to promote the attainment of specifically social goals
(Keltner & Buswell, 1997). Humans evolved to navigate within a social structure that has complex layers of
multiple, overlapping, and sometimes nontransitive
social hierarchies (e.g., the highest status hunters were
not always the highest status warriors). Consistent with
this account, self-conscious emotions seem to be present only in humans and other species (e.g., great apes)
with highly complex and frequently shifting social hierarchies (de Waal, 1989; Keltner & Buswell, 1997).
Survival and reproduction have depended on overcoming numerous complicated social problems, including
“dyadic, triadic, or group-level cooperation; smooth
group functioning; cheating; detection of cheaters;

Downloaded by [New York University] at 04:28 25 June 2015

TARGET ARTICLE

intragroup (and, particularly, intrasexual) competition,
and intergroup competition” (Sedikides &
Skowronski, 1997, p. 92). Self-conscious emotions
may have evolved in species with complex self-representations and self-awareness to coordinate and motivate behaviors essential to these social dynamics.
Collectively, the self-conscious emotions are assumed
to promote behaviors that increase the stability of social hierarchies and affirm status roles. For example,
researchers have argued that embarrassment and
shame evolved for purposes of appeasement, guilt for
encouraging communal relationships, and pride for establishing dominance (Baumeister et al., 1994; Gilbert,
1998; Keltner & Buswell, 1997; Tracy & Robins,
2003c). More specifically, the expression of shame
may draw forgiveness and sympathy from onlookers
(Keltner & Harker, 1998), and the expression of pride
may promote social status by increasing the individual’s visibility to others following a socially valued
achievement (Tracy & Robins, 2003c).3
In addition to serving these communicative and interpersonal functions, self-conscious emotions may
also serve intrapsychic functions. Self-conscious emotions guide individual behavior by compelling us to do
things that are socially valued and to avoid doing
things that lead to social approbation (Tangney &
Dearing, 2002). We strive to achieve, to be a “good
person,” or to treat others well because doing so makes
us proud of ourselves, and failing to do so makes us
feel guilty or ashamed of ourselves.4 Put simply, society tells us what kind of person we should be; we internalize these beliefs in the form of actual and ideal
self-representations; and self-conscious emotions motivate behavioral action toward the goals embodied in
these self-representations. Thus, although we might
3

We do not mean to imply that only those animals who experience
self-conscious emotions show appeasement or dominance behaviors.
We believe that in humans self-conscious emotions are the mechanisms that motivate these behaviors, and it is likely that emotions
have certain advantages as behavioral motivators (for a brief discussion of these advantages, see Scherer, 1994). In animals who do not
experience self-conscious emotions, the motivational system for appeasement, dominance, and other social behaviors may be based in
more primitive stimulus-response mechanisms.
4
Interestingly, this motivational function of self-conscious emotions may develop later than the subjective experience of the emotions. Graham (1988) examined relations among causal attributions,
guilt and pride feelings, and behaviors in children of various ages.
She found that controlling for reported feelings of guilt and pride removed any relation between attributions and behaviors in older children but had no effect on the relation between attributions and behaviors in younger children (ages 5 and 6). This suggests that young
children need to think through appropriate behavioral responses to
guilt-provoking events, rather than be automatically motivated by
their feelings. For older children and adults, self-conscious emotions
may save precious cognitive resources; we do not need to cognize
moral responses to our bad behavior because we are motivated to act
by our feelings alone (and, as the partial correlations suggest, if we
did not feel guilt there would be no relation between the event and our
responsive behavior).

know cognitively that we should help others in need, it
takes the psychological force of an emotion such as
guilt to make us act in altruistic ways. By reinforcing
prosocial behaviors—encouraging us to act in ways
that promote social acceptance—self-conscious emotions facilitate interpersonal reciprocity, a social arrangement that is highly beneficial in the long term
(Trivers, 1971).

Self-Conscious Emotions Do Not Have
Discrete, Universally Recognized
Facial Expressions
All six of the basic emotions have a discrete, universally recognized facial expression (Ekman, 2003). In
contrast, researchers have failed to find a distinct facial
expression for any self-conscious emotion. They have,
however, found a distinct expression that includes
bodily posture or head movement combined with facial expressions for embarrassment, pride, and possibly shame (Heckhausen, 1984; Keltner, 1995; Lewis et
al., 1992; Tracy & Robins, 2004b). As Lewis (2000)
noted, “Self-conscious emotions cannot be described
solely by examining a particular set of facial movements; they necessitate the observation of bodily action more than facial cues” (p. 623). In fact, pride can
be reliably identified from a postural display involving
the full upper body (revealing an expanded posture),
but it cannot be recognized when observers are shown
the face alone (Tracy & Robins, 2004b).
A number of theorists have argued that emotions
necessarily have universal, discrete nonverbal expressions (e.g., Darwin, 1872; Ekman, 1992b). According
to this perspective, emotions evolved to communicate
needs to an individual’s conspecifics, so every emotion
should have an expressive signal reflecting its evolutionary origins (Ekman, 1992b). This argument has
been used to exclude self-conscious emotions from the
category of basic emotions, or to include them only as
potential emotions until a discrete expression is uncovered (Ekman, 1994). However, there are several reasons why self-conscious emotions may not have a
discrete facial signal. First, they may be effectively
communicated through more complex nonverbal behaviors than a simple, immediate facial muscle movement (Barrett & Campos, 1987). As mentioned earlier,
at least a few of the self-conscious emotions are communicated through postural changes or bodily movement, which may be as effective in communication as
facial expressions (Keltner, 1995; Tracy & Robins,
2004b). These signals may be more complex than facial expressions but this fits with their more complex
messages. In other words, a quick facial expression
may be adequate for telling conspecifics, “Run!”, but a
more complex bodily expression may better convey
107

Downloaded by [New York University] at 04:28 25 June 2015

TRACY & ROBINS

the message, “I just did something that makes me deserve high status.”
Second, self-conscious emotions may be expressed
more frequently through language than through nonverbal expressions. Self-conscious emotions may have
evolved more recently than basic emotions, as social
groups and social interactions became more complex
and varied forms of communication, including linguistic communication, became possible (P. Ekman, personal communication, March 2002). In other words, at
the point in our evolutionary history when self-conscious emotions emerged, linguistic and gestural forms
of communication may have been available to be
co-opted for verbal expression of emotions. Although
facial expressions have the advantage of being automatic and immediate, self-conscious emotions communicate messages that are typically less urgent than
basic emotions and perhaps allow for more deliberate
processing and the production of linguistic forms of
communication. For example, conveying one’s guilt
over a social transgression is important, but it is important over a longer time frame than conveying one’s fear
about the presence of a predator.
A third possible explanation for the absence of facial signals in self-conscious emotions is that expressing these emotions may sometimes be
maladaptive, making it more important that they can
be regulated. Facial expressions are more difficult to
regulate than body movements and posture because
many of the facial muscle contractions involved are
involuntary responses. Although in contemporary society we may wish we could control the expression of
all our emotions (e.g., avoid showing fear in front of
our boss), in our evolutionary history it was clearly
more adaptive that our (basic) emotions be automatically expressed. The expression of self-conscious
emotions, however, may be less directly essential to
survival and, in some cases, may be detrimental to
fitness. For example, in many cultures it is considered unacceptable to openly display pride, and such
displays may lower a person’s likeability or spur the
formation of coalitions against the person (Eid &
Diener, 2001; Mosquera, Manstead, & Fischer, 2000;
Paulhus, 1998; Zammuner, 1996). Furthermore, individuals regulate not only the expression but also the
experience of self-conscious emotions. Shame is such
a self-damaging and painful emotion that its experience may be automatically suppressed through elaborate cognitive reappraisals. Clinicians have discussed
“bypassed shame”—shame that has been transformed
through regulation into some other emotion, usually
anger or hostility (Lewis, 1971; Scheff, Retzinger, &
Ryan, 1989). If regulation is the norm for self-conscious emotions, we may not expect a reliably associated discrete expression for each.
In summary, there are several possible explanations
for the absence of facial expressions in self-conscious
108

emotions, all of which suggest that these emotions are,
as a group, distinct from basic emotions.

Self-Conscious Emotions Are
Cognitively Complex
A fifth distinctive feature of self-conscious emotions
is that they are more cognitively complex than basic
emotions (Izard et al., 1999; Lewis, 2000). Izard and his
colleagues labeled shame, guilt, and pride “cognition-dependent” emotions, in comparison with the relatively “cognition-independent” basic emotions (Izard et
al., 1999, p. 92). To experience fear, individuals need
very few cognitive capacities; they must simply appraise an event as threatening survival goals (e.g., Lazarus, 1991). To experience shame, however, an individual must have the capacity to form stable
self-representations; internalize an external, societal, or
parental perspective on those self-representations; and
reflect on the discrepancy between his or her own behavior, external evaluations of that behavior, and various self-representations. In other words, the individual
must take into account goals far beyond survival: goals
related to identity and ideal-self-representations. In addition, self-conscious emotions require additional appraisals beyond goal relevance and congruence; they require complex causal attributions (Graham & Weiner,
1986). As we will explain when we describe our process
model, self-conscious emotions cannot occur unless the
eliciting event is attributed to internal causes—the self.
We also explain how further causal attributions about
the stability and globality of causes may distinguish
among different self-conscious emotions. Basic emotions can involve these kinds of complex cognitive processes, but, unlike self-conscious emotions, they also
can (and often do) occur with much simpler appraisals
(Le Doux, 1996).
Given the previous set of distinctive features, it becomes apparent that self-conscious emotions need to
be conceptualized in a somewhat different manner
than basic emotions. In the next section, we briefly explain why existing theories and models of emotions do
not fully capture the self-conscious emotion process.
We then present a new model tailored to the psychological processes governing the elicitation of self-conscious emotions.
Process Model of Self-Conscious
Emotions
Background
According to most emotion theorists, emotions are
initiated by the perception of a stimulus, which is evaluated (appraised) either consciously or unconsciously,
setting off an “affect program” (e.g., Ekman, 1992b).

Downloaded by [New York University] at 04:28 25 June 2015

TARGET ARTICLE

The affect program is assumed to be a discrete neural
pattern that produces a coordinated set of responses,
including action readiness and associated behaviors,
physiological changes, a discrete facial expression,
and a subjective feeling state. This model provides an
adequate account of basic emotions. For example, anger occurs when a particular stimulus is appraised as
thwarting a survival goal (Lazarus, 1991), generating
an affect program that leads to a coordinated set of responses including the behavioral impulse to oppose or
resist (Frijda, 1987), autonomic nervous system activity related to the flight-or-fight response (Levenson,
Carstensen, Friesen, & Ekman, 1991), a discrete facial
expression characterized by narrowed eyes, lowered
eyebrows, and tightened lips (Ekman & Friesen,
1975), and the subjective feeling of anger.
The central limitation of this model is that it assumes a very simple appraisal process focused on survival goals, which may not be appropriate for
self-conscious emotions. It is unlikely that any quick
and simple cognitive process will generate shame in all
individuals. Thus, we turned to a second body of research, on appraisal theories of emotion, to revise and
extend the generic model.
Appraisal theories were developed specifically to
describe the cognitive appraisals that distinguish
among emotions (e.g., Lazarus, 1991; Roseman, 1991;
Scherer, 2001; Smith & Ellsworth, 1985). The two
most essential appraisals in almost all these theories involve evaluations of whether the eliciting event is (a)
relevant to and (b) congruent with the individual’s
goals and needs (e.g., Lazarus, 1991). The goals at
stake are generally viewed as survival and reproduction; most appraisal theorists agree that emotions
evolved to serve adaptive functions. Events that are
congruent with survival goals (e.g., escaping from a
predator) generate positive emotions such as joy and
relief; those that are incongruent (e.g., being caught by
a predator) generate negative emotions such as fear
and anger. Beyond appraisals of relevance and congruence, there is little consensus about which other appraisals generate and differentiate among specific
emotions. A number of theories have been advanced
(e.g., Lazarus, 1991; Roseman, 1991; Scherer, 2001;
Smith & Ellsworth, 1985; Smith & Lazarus, 1993), but
their exact components, stimulus checks, or core-relational themes vary (Frijda, 1987).
Several of these theories include appraisals related
to self-conscious emotions; for example, most include
an appraisal of self-relevance or self-compatibility.
However, appraisals of self-relevance are sometimes
conflated with appraisals of general goal relevance
(e.g., Frijda, 1987). In addition, the theories that mention self-relevance tend not to explicate what it means
and seem to imply a very rudimentary notion of
self—the ability to distinguish between self and
other—which is very different from the elaborate

self-awareness and self-representations that we think
are essential to self-conscious emotions. Other theorists include appraisals about whether the cause of the
eliciting event is located within the self, and have proposed appraisal dimensions such as agency, accountability, and responsibility (e.g., Ellsworth & Smith,
1988; Gehm & Scherer, 1988; Roseman, 1991; Smith
& Ellsworth, 1985; Smith & Lazarus, 1993; Weiner,
1985). These appraisals about causal locus are believed to distinguish between self-conscious and
non-self-conscious emotions (e.g., shame vs. anger),
however they do not distinguish among different
self-conscious emotions, such as shame vs. guilt (e.g.,
Ellsworth & Smith, 1988; Gehm & Scherer, 1988;
Russell & McAuley, 1986; Smith & Ellsworth, 1985).
Furthermore, these various notions of causal locus
(e.g., responsibility vs. agency) are conceptually different, however there is no clear model of which are
most relevant to self-conscious emotions. Thus, although existing appraisal theories suggest some potentially relevant appraisal dimensions, they do not
provide a clear, consensual picture of the precise set of
appraisals that generate self-conscious emotions, or
provide a model that links the relevant set of appraisals
in a theoretically coherent manner.
A final limitation of extant models of basic emotions,
when applied to self-conscious emotions, is that they do
not fully incorporate self-evaluative processes. For example, there is little discussion of the role of more complex self-processes, such as self-focused attention, the
activation of stable self-representations, and the process
of reflecting on discrepancies between a current
self-state and some evaluative standard relevant to
one’s identity (e.g., an ideal self-representation). A
complete process model of self-conscious emotions requires the inclusion of these elements, as was made clear
by our discussion of the distinctive features.

Overview of Model
Figure 1 shows a proposed model of the self-conscious emotion process. The model builds on previous
theory and research on causal attributions and emotions (e.g., Covington & Omelich, 1981; Jagacinski &
Nicholls, 1984; Weiner, 1985); cognitive appraisals
and emotions (e.g., Lazarus, 1991, Scherer, 2001;
Roseman, 2001; Ellsworth & Smith, 1988); the cognitive antecedents of shame, guilt, and pride (e.g., H. B.
Lewis, 1971; M. Lewis, 2000; Tangney, 1991); and
self-evaluative processes (e.g., Brown, 1998; Carver &
Scheier, 1998; Cooley, 1902; Duval & Wicklund,
1972; Higgins, 1987).
One benefit of the proposed model is that it generates specific, testable hypotheses. In each following
section, we state a prediction derived from the model
109

Downloaded by [New York University] at 04:28 25 June 2015

TRACY & ROBINS

Figure 1. Process model of self-conscious emotions. The dotted arrow connecting “Locus Attribution” and “Embarrassment” indicates that a
public self-representation must be activated in order for embarrassment to occur. “A-O Pride” signifies achievement-oriented pride, discussed in
a later section.

and then describe the theoretical and empirical rationale for it.

Survival Goal-Relevance: Is the Event
Relevant to Survival and
Reproduction?
Prediction 1: Events appraised as relevant to survival goals will lead to one of the basic emotions.
As shown in Figure 1, the first appraisal in the proposed model is the same as that in most other appraisal
theories: an evaluation of whether the eliciting event is
relevant to survival and reproduction (e.g., Lazarus,
1991).5 Events appraised as survival-goal relevant include those that immediately affect fitness, such as the
sudden approach of a poisonous snake; as well as those
5

Figure 1 implies a clear order and a serial, step-by-step sequence
of conscious appraisals. However, the actual process presumably includes numerous feedback loops and may work bidirectionally and in
parallel. Moreover, many of the appraisal processes are likely to occur implicitly (Bargh & Chartrand, 1999). Nonetheless, to simplify
explanation of the model, we discuss the emotion process described
in Figure 1 as if it occurred in a simple serial order. Appraisal theorists have argued that representational models such as this usefully
elucidate appraisal theories of emotions (Kappas, 2001), and several
theorists have proposed models that seem to work in a clear sequential order (e.g., Scherer, 2001). Furthermore, even if the processes described in Figure 1 actually occur simultaneously or in parallel, our
model can elucidate the mental algorithms through which these processes are integrated to determine which particular self-conscious
emotion is produced.

110

that influence fitness much more slowly, such as waiting for the results of an important medical test. Events
appraised as relevant to an individual’s survival goals
will lead to one of the basic emotions, according to appraisal and functionalist theories of the basic emotion
process (e.g., Lazarus, 1991; Nesse, 1990; Roseman,
2001; Scherer, 2001; Smith & Kirby, 2001). If an event
is appraised as irrelevant to survival goals, it will elicit
no emotion—unless it is appraised as relevant to identity goals (see below).6

Attentional Focus on the Self:
Activation of Self-Representations
Prediction 2: Self-conscious emotions require
attentional focus directed toward the objective,
“me” self, activating self-representations.
As shown in Figure 1, the next cognitive process
in the model involves attentional focus. Many events
direct attention toward the self rather than toward
the external environment. The resultant state of
attentional focus has been labeled objective
self-awareness (Duval & Wicklund, 1972) or self-focused attention (Carver & Scheier, 1998); it is defined
as a particular form of consciousness in which atten6

It is possible, however, that there exists a small class of eliciting
events that can produce emotions without appraisals of goal relevance. For example, viewing a work of art or a beautiful landscape
might elicit joy or awe with no cognitive mediation.

Downloaded by [New York University] at 04:28 25 June 2015

TARGET ARTICLE

tion (I) is focused on one’s stable self-representations
(me) (Buss, 1980; Carver & Scheier, 1998). This state
of self-focused attention and corresponding activated
self-representations allows individuals to make reflexive self-evaluations.
An individual’s stable self-representations may include actual or current self-representations (“I am independent”), ideal or hoped-for self-representations
(“I want to become more independent”), and ought
self-representations about fulfilling important obligations and duties (“My parents think I should become
more independent”) (Higgins, 1987). These self-representations may concern past, present, and future selves
(Markus & Nurius, 1986; Wilson & Ross, 2001) and
may refer to private (personal) and public (relational,
social, and collective) aspects of the self (Robins,
Norem, & Cheek, 1999). Collectively, these various
forms of self-representations constitute a person’s
identity.
According to our theoretical model, self-representations must be activated (either explicitly or implicitly)
for self-conscious emotions to occur. When attention is
directed toward the self, activating self-representations, the individual can make comparisons between
these representations and the external emotion-eliciting event. These comparisons are a necessary causal
element of self-conscious emotions. In contrast, we believe that individuals cannot experience self-conscious
emotions when their attention is directed exclusively
outward toward the external environment, preventing
the activation of self-representations. For example,
when individuals are absorbed in a state of “flow,” in
which all attention is focused on a particular, often
challenging, activity, they tend not to become self-conscious (Csikszentmihalyi, 1990).
What causes attentional focus to be placed on the
self? Self-focused attention may be evoked automatically by events that have a prior history of relevance to
self-representations (e.g., achievement situations for
students), or by events that naturally draw attention to
the self, such as seeing one’s reflection in a mirror. Indeed, much experimental research on self-awareness
has used mirror placement to induce self-focused attention (Buss, 1980; Duval & Wicklund, 1972; Scheier
& Carver, 1977). Furthermore, because the “me” self
may be activated at an implicit level, self-conscious
emotions may still be generated even when individuals
are highly motivated to avoid them. For example, a student who fails an exam may avoid thinking explicitly
about what this event means for her or his self-representations. At an implicit level, however, her or his
goals and self-representations may well be activated,
eventually generating shame or guilt despite her or his
attempt to defend against these emotions.
Our emphasis on the importance of self-focused attention is supported by previous research showing that
self-focus intensifies emotional experiences. Studies

have shown that objective self-awareness can lead to
emotional discomfort and negative affect regarding the
self, presumably because attentional focus on the self
often promotes the recognition of self-flaws (e.g.,
Duval & Wicklund, 1972). Consistent with these findings, Carver and Scheier (1998) argued that individuals must place attentional focus on the self to recognize
the discrepancies between current self-states and goal
states (e.g., ideal-self standards) that produce positive
or negative emotional experiences. They have shown
that experimentally induced self-focused attention accentuates the intensity of positive or negative emotions
(e.g., Scheier & Carver, 1977). In a rare study that examined the role of self-focused attention in the generation of specifically self-conscious emotions, Beer et al.
(2002) found that patients with a brain lesion in their
orbital-frontal cortex did not experience embarrassment after behaving in a socially inappropriate manner
unless they viewed a videotape of their behavior, presumably enhancing self-focused attention in patients
who lack the capacity to become automatically
self-aware.

Identity Goal-Relevance: Does it
Matter For How I See Myself?
Prediction 3: Appraisals of identity-goal relevance are necessary for the elicitation of self-conscious emotions.
When attentional focus is directed toward self-representations, events can be appraised for their relevance to identity goals (see Figure 1). This appraisal
concerns whether particular events are important or
meaningful for who a person is and who he or she
would like to be (i.e., for one’s identity). In general,
any event relevant to an important self-representation
is likely to be appraised as relevant to an identity goal.
In contrast, an event that is relevant to an individual’s
proximal adaptive fitness will be appraised as survival-goal relevant. For example, if a man camping in
the woods sees a bear, he is likely to appraise this event
as relevant to his survival goals and feel fear—a basic
emotion. However, if he is camping with his girlfriend,
and his awareness of her presence activates self-focused attention on his self-representations regarding
gender-stereotypical camping behavior, seeing a bear
may also be appraised as relevant to his identity goals.
In this case, the event would also generate self-conscious emotions. He may valiantly attempt to fight the
bear, which could generate pride if he scares the bear
away. Alternatively, he may run and scream in terror,
which could generate shame or guilt because he has
failed to live up to his “boyfriend as protector” identity, particularly if he leaves his girlfriend behind to become bear food. As a result, at times, survival and
identity goals may come into conflict and promote
111

Downloaded by [New York University] at 04:28 25 June 2015

TRACY & ROBINS

seemingly maladaptive human behavior if identity
goals prevail. For example, the camper’s attempt to
fight the bear is consistent with his identity goals but
not with his survival goals. Similarly, a battered wife
may choose to remain in a maladaptive abusive relationship, in part because it meets her identity goals
about marriage and motherhood.
According to our model, events appraised as relevant to identity goals will generate self-conscious
emotions, assuming subsequent appraisals (described
later) occur. (Importantly, events appraised as relevant
to identity goals can also generate basic emotions, as
we discuss later.) As shown in Figure 1, events appraised as irrelevant to identity goals will not generate
self-conscious emotions.7
There is little research specifically examining how
appraisals of identity-goal relevance influence the
self-conscious emotion process. By distinguishing between survival and identity goals, our model thus provides an important direction for future studies. Another
novel aspect of our model is that it articulates the full
range of self-representations that may be involved in
the appraisal of identity-goal relevance. An event may
be appraised as identity-goal relevant because it activates an actual, ideal, or ought self (Higgins, 1987); a
past, present, or future self (Markus & Nurius, 1986);
and a private or public aspect of the self (Buss, 1980).
These various representations are likely to influence
the self-conscious emotion process in complex ways
that are beyond the scope of this article but that could
be fruitfully explored in future research. For example,
it seems possible that guilt more frequently stems from
activation of a past self-representation (“Why didn’t I
study enough last quarter?”) whereas pride is often
linked to a future self-representation (“I would like to
become an ‘A’ student”).

Identity-Goal Congruence: Is This
Event Congruent With My Goals For
Who I Am and Who I Want to Be?
Prediction 4: Positive self-conscious emotions
(e.g., pride) are elicited by appraisals of identity-goal
congruence, and negative self-conscious emotions
(e.g., shame, guilt, embarrassment) are elicited by appraisals of identity-goal incongruence.
When an event has been appraised as relevant to
identity goals, the next step in our model is for it to be
appraised as congruent or incongruent with these goals
(see Figure 1). This appraisal determines the valence of

the outcome emotion; positive or pleasurable emotions
are elicited by goal-congruent events, and negative or
displeasureable emotions are elicited by goal-incongruent events (Lazarus, 1991).8
How do individuals decide whether an event is congruent or incongruent with identity goals? As noted
previously, appraisals of identity relevance activate
current self-representations, which may be linked to
multiple aspects of an individual’s stable identity (i.e.,
actual, ideal, ought self; past, present, or future self;
private or public self). For example, the event of failing
an exam might activate the current self-representation
“failing student.” To determine goal congruence, this
current self-representation is compared with the individual’s stable, long-term self-representations, including actual self-representations (“I am a successful
student”), ideal self-representations (“I want to be a
successful student”), and so on (e.g., Higgins, 1987).
In this case, the student may notice a discrepancy between the current self-representation (failing student)
and actual and ideal self-representations, and would
thus appraise the event as identity-goal incongruent.
As shown in Figure 1, this appraisal will eventually
elicit a negative self-conscious emotion such as shame
or guilt. Conversely, performing well on an exam
would activate the current self-representation “succeeding student,” which would be congruent with the
student’s actual and ideal self-representations and
would thus generate a positive self-conscious emotion
such as pride.
As can be seen from this example, appraisals of
identity-goal congruence may be highly complex because events can be congruent or incongruent with a
wide range of often-conflicting self-representations.
For example, performing well on an exam could be
congruent with a private actual self-representation, “I
am a successful student” but incongruent with a public
actual self-representation “I am a fun-loving bohemian
who doesn’t care about school.” Similarly, this event
could be congruent with a relational ought self-representation, “My parents want me to be a successful student,” but incongruent with a social ought
self-representation, “My friends think I should be a
fun-loving bohemian who doesn’t care about school.”
Although our model incorporates various self-representations into its conceptualization of identity-goal
relevance and congruence, it does not predict whether
the self-conscious emotion process works differently
when different types of self-representations are activated. Although it seems likely that any form of con8

7

It is quite possible for an event to be appraised as relevant to survival and identity goals, in which case the person might experience a
combination of basic and self-conscious emotions. For example, the
bear-encountering camper will likely experience fear and pride,
should he choose to fight the bear.

112

Although not shown in Figure 1, the appraisal of goal-congruence would lead to two separate paths, depending on congruency or
incongruency. The subsequent series of appraisals are identical, however the outcome emotions are either positive or negative. To simplify the figure, we combine the two paths and show the specific positive and negative emotions at the end of the model.

Downloaded by [New York University] at 04:28 25 June 2015

TARGET ARTICLE

gruence will produce a positive emotional experience
and any form of incongruence a negative one, the particular self-representations activated may influence the
subsequent processes specified by the model and ultimately elicit different emotions. In fact, Higgins
(1987) theorized that discrepancies between different
types of self-representations (actual self vs. ought self
vs. ideal self) generate different forms of negative affect (dejection vs. agitation emotions). However, Higgins did not specify which processes distinguish
between a dejection-related self-conscious emotion
such as shame and a dejection-related non-self-conscious emotion such as sadness. Furthermore, Higgins
argued that a discrepancy between one’s actual and
ideal self produces shame but not guilt, whereas a discrepancy between one’s actual and ought self produces
the opposite pattern. Contrary to this prediction,
Tangney, Niedenthal, Covert, and Barlow (1998)
found that actual-ought and actual-ideal discrepancies
were related to shame proneness, however neither
form of discrepancy was related to guilt proneness.
Thus, the distinction between these different forms of
self-discrepancies may be less important than are other
subsequent appraisals, elaborated later, in determining
whether a self-conscious or non-self-conscious emotion will occur, and, if self-conscious, which particular
emotion will occur.
Our emphasis on the role of discrepancies between
current self-representations and more stable self-representations is based on earlier conceptualizations of self
and emotions. Cooley (1902) and James (1890), for example, discussed the affective consequences of comparisons between actual and ideal self-states. Carver
and Scheier (1998) proposed that positive and negative
affect are the output of a cybernetic self-regulation
process. According to their model, awareness of a discrepancy between a current self-state and some
evaluative standard (e.g., an ideal self-representation)
generates negative affect, whereas reduction of such a
discrepancy generates positive affect. Our model
builds on this view by specifying the distinct types of
negative and positive emotions that are generated by
these discrepancies.
Internality Attributions: Did the Event
Occur Because of Something About
Me?
Prediction 5: Self-conscious emotions require attributions to internal causes, whereas basic emotions
do not.
When an event has been appraised as either congruent or incongruent with identity goals, the next step is
to determine the cause of the event (see Figure 1). This
decision involves a set of appraisals, the most important of which concerns the causal locus of the eliciting
event: Is the event due to an internal (within the indi-

vidual) or external (outside the individual) cause?9
This question can be phrased as “Am I responsible for
the event?” or, because it need not imply intentionality,
“Did it occur because of something about me?” This
distinction is particularly important in the case of embarrassment, where internal appraisals are often made
about events for which the individual had no responsibility or intentionality (e.g., being the recipient of
spilled soup). Appraisals of causal locus may occur
spontaneously for events ranging from failure on an
important exam to receiving an angry glare from a
stranger in the street. In appraisal theories of emotion,
this judgment is referred to as credit or blame to oneself (Lazarus, 1991), accountability (Smith & Lazarus,
1993), agency (Ellsworth & Smith, 1988; Roseman,
1991), responsibility (Frijda, 1987), or “causal attribution check” (Scherer, 2001).
The appraisal of causal locus has been studied extensively by attribution researchers, and a large body
of empirical and theoretical work has demonstrated the
importance of internality attributions in determining
behavioral, cognitive, and emotional reactions to
achievement and interpersonal situations (e.g., Heider,
1958; Peterson, 1991; Weiner, 1985). In particular,
self-attributions are critically involved in self-esteem
regulation: To maintain self-esteem, individuals take
credit for success and externalize blame for failure
(Greenwald, 1980; Harvey & Weary, 1984). Thus,
self-attributions influence and are influenced by
self-evaluative processes and consequently play a central role in the generation of self-conscious emotions.
As shown in Figure 1, self-conscious emotions occur when individuals attribute the eliciting event to internal causes (Lewis, 2000; Tangney & Dearing, 2002;
Weiner, 1985).10 Supporting this claim, studies have
shown that internal attributions for failure tend to produce guilt and shame, and internal attributions for success tend to produce pride (Weiner, 1985; Weiner,
Graham, & Chandler, 1982). Research by emotion theorists on the appraisal dimensions of agency and
self-accountability also supports this distinction: Both
appraisals are associated with the experience of
self-conscious emotions (Ellsworth & Smith, 1988;
Roseman, 1991; Smith & Lazarus, 1993).
9

People can attribute an event to both internal and external causes
(Robins, Spranca, & Mendelsohn, 1996). In this case, our model
would predict that the person would experience basic and self-conscious emotions (e.g., anger and shame).
10
Of note, the self-focused attentional state that sets in motion the
self-conscious emotion process tends to promote appraisals about
causal locus (because self-focused attention leads to questioning
about why a self-impacting event happened) and also encourages
making internal attributions. Studies have shown increased self-focused attention leads to increased self-blame for events (Cohen,
Dowling, Bishop, & Maney, 1985; Duval & Wicklund, 1973;
Fenigstein & Levine, 1984). This illustrates one way in which the
various appraisal processes are intricately entwined.

113

Downloaded by [New York University] at 04:28 25 June 2015

TRACY & ROBINS

In contrast, attributing events to external causes
leads to basic emotions instead. Thus, our model predicts, and studies have shown (Russell & McAuley,
1986), that basic emotions such as anger can be elicited
by identity-goal relevant events (e.g., exam failure) if
they are blamed on external rather than internal causes.
In fact, in contemporary society, this causal pathway
may be the most typical route for the elicitation of basic emotions, given how rarely threats to survival occur. People are more likely to become angry or fearful
because they have made an external attribution for a
threat to their identity, such as an insult from a
coworker or friend, than from a direct threat to their
survival. Supporting this argument, Markus and
Kitayama (1991) asserted that most emotions are elicited by self-oriented concerns. Nonetheless, basic
emotions can be elicited by appraisals about survival
and reproductive goals alone, and it is likely that they
evolved primarily to help individuals in achieving
these goals.
In summary, our model extends previous research on the relation between internality attributions and self-conscious emotions by suggesting
that these attributions (a) mediate the relation between self-representations or identity goals and
outcome emotions and (b) determine which class of
emotions (basic vs. self-conscious) results from appraisals of identity-goal relevance.

Stability and Globality Attributions: Is
it Something I Always Do? Is it
Something About Who I Am?
Two other causal attributions, beyond causal locus,
may be important for the elicitation of self-conscious
emotions and, more specifically, for differentiating
among self-conscious emotions (see Figure 1). These
two attributions concern the stability, or permanence,
of causes, and the globality, or generality, of causes.
Central to the attribution process, these two causal factors have been empirically linked to various emotional
states (e.g., Brown & Weiner, 1984; Covington &
Omelich, 1981; Niedenthal, Tangney, & Gavanski,
1994; Tangney et al., 1992; Weiner et al., 1982;
Weiner & Kukla, 1970).
When an internal attribution has been made, appraisals about stability become questions about
whether the event was caused by something stable and
unchanging about the person, such as ability, or by
something unstable, such as effort in a particular situation. For example, a student who makes an internal attribution for failing a math exam might blame her lack
of intelligence (a stable cause), or she might blame her
lack of studying for this particular exam (an unstable
cause).
114

Appraisals about the globality of internal causes become questions of whether the event was caused by
something about the individual as a whole or by something specific about the person. To use the same example, the exam-failing student might blame her failure
on being globally unintelligent, or on her lack of specific skills in mathematics. Although these two attribution dimensions are theoretically independent, in
everyday causal attributions the two are frequently
conflated and highly correlated; that is, stable causes
are more likely to be global, and unstable causes are
more likely to be specific (Peterson, 1991).
According to the model, globality and stability attributions influence which particular self-conscious emotion is elicited. As shown in Figure 1, shame and hubris
(a globalized form of pride discussed in greater detail
later) are caused by global, stable attributions; guilt
and a more achievement-oriented pride are caused by
specific, unstable attributions. In the next section, we
discuss in detail the precise appraisal process that produce each of the main self-conscious emotions (shame,
guilt, pride, and embarrassment) and present specific
predictions concerning globability and stability.11

Cognitive Antecedents That
Distinguish Among Self-Conscious
Emotions
Prediction 6: Shame requires attributions to stable,
global aspects of the self.
Prediction 7: Guilt requires attributions to unstable, specific aspects of the self.
Prediction 8: Embarrassment requires appraisals
of identity-goal relevance and incongruence regarding
a public identity, and attributions to internal causes.
Prediction 9: Hubristic pride requires attributions
to stable, global aspects of the self.
Prediction 10: Achievement-oriented pride requires attributions to unstable, specific aspects of the
self.

11

Another possible self-conscious emotion is humiliation. There is
little previous empirical research on humiliation, outside of the clinical literature. In fact, in Tangney and Fischer’s (1995) volume on
self-conscious emotions, the index includes only two mentions of humiliation. In both of these mentions, humiliation is referred to as a
variant of shame. Others have emphasized that humiliation cannot
occur in absence of a humiliating other; that, unlike shame, it is dependent on a dyadic relationship (e.g., Gilbert, 1997; Miller, 1988).
We believe that humiliation occurs when attentional focus is directed
specifically toward the “public” self (as in the case of embarrassment) and is blamed on internal, stable, global causes (as in the case
of shame). In general, further research is needed before any clear conclusions can be made regarding humiliation, and we hope that the
model proposed here can help generate testable hypotheses about the
causal antecedents of this emotion.

Downloaded by [New York University] at 04:28 25 June 2015

TARGET ARTICLE

Shame and guilt. According to our model, shame
and guilt are elicited by a common set of cognitive processes. For both emotions, an individual must focus attention on some aspect of the self, activating public and/or
private self-representations; appraise the event as relevant
to and incongruent with identity goals; and attribute the
cause of the event to some internal factor, blaming the self
for the situation. Thus, as a number of emotion theorists
have argued (e.g., Lazarus, 1991; Tomkins, 1963), shame
and guilt have similar elicitors. What distinguishes the
causal antecedents of the two emotions, however, are stability and globality attributions: Shame involves negative
feelings about the stable, global self, whereas guilt involves negative feelings about a specific behavior or action taken by the self (Lewis, 1971; Lewis, 2000; Tangney
& Dearing, 2002). Following this theoretical conception,
our model specifies that internal, stable, global attributions (“I’m a dumb person”) lead to shame, whereas internal, unstable, specific attributions (“I didn’t try hard
enough”) lead to guilt. To take a typical example from the
interpersonal domain, an individual who cheats on his relationship partner will likely feel guilt if he blames his
cheating on a one-time, specific behavior but will feel
shame if he blames it on his stable inability to be a generally good boyfriend.
Several lines of research support this distinction between shame and guilt. In particular, research on achievement attributions has shown that individuals who blame
poor performances on ability (an internal, stable factor)
are more likely to feel shame, whereas individuals who
blame poor performance on effort (an internal, unstable
factor) are more likely to feel guilt (Brown & Weiner,
1984; Covington & Omelich, 1981; Jagacinski &
Nicholls, 1984; Tracy & Robins, 2002). Examining attributions and emotions in a more general sense (beyond
achievement events only), Tangney et al. (1992) found
that shame-prone individuals tend to make internal,
global attributions for negative events, although they
failed to find the corresponding positive correlation between internal, specific attributions and guilt.
Using an innovative approach, Niedenthal et al.
(1994) found that participants who were instructed to
make counterfactual statements about changing a stable, global aspect of their self-concept (e.g., “If only I
were a better friend”) reported greater shame and less
guilt in response to a hypothetical scenario than did
those told to make counterfactuals changing their specific behavior (e.g., “If only I had not flirted with his
date”). In a separate line of research, studies on behavioral outcomes of emotions have shown that shame often leads to escapist or hiding behaviors, suggesting
irremediable impact to the stable, global self (see
Tangney, Burggraf, & Wagner, 1995). In contrast,
guilt has been associated with reparative behaviors,
suggesting impact to aspects of the self that can be
changed (Barrett, 1995; Doosje, Branscombe, Spears,
& Manstead, 1998).

Embarrassment. Similar to shame and guilt,
embarrassment requires an appraisal of identity-goal
relevance and identity-goal incongruence, and attributions to internal causes. However, unlike shame and
guilt, embarrassment does not seem to require any further attributions, and as conceptualized in our model,
embarrassment can occur only when attentional focus
is directed toward the public self, activating corresponding public self-representations. That is, an individual can become embarrassed by events blamed on
internal, stable, and global aspects of the public self,
such as repeatedly being publicly exposed as incompetent; or by events blamed on internal, unstable, and specific aspects of the public self, such as spilling soup on
one’s boss.
This account implies that embarrassment is less
cognition dependent than shame or guilt, both of which
seem to depend on additional appraisal dimensions.
Supporting this claim, embarrassment emerges earlier
in childhood than shame or guilt (Lewis et al., 1989).
This finding led Lewis et al. (1989) to place embarrassment within a first class of self-conscious emotions,
and guilt and shame within a second class of self-conscious emotions that “require more cognitive capacity”
(p. 148). Similarly, Izard et al. (1999) included shame,
guilt, and pride but not embarrassment within the category of cognition-dependent self-conscious emotions.
According to our model, if the two additional, more
complex appraisals (stability and globality) are made
in cases when public self-representations are activated,
then shame or guilt will co-occur with embarrassment.
Thus, the key distinctive features of embarrassment
are its relative cognitive simplicity and the fact that
attentional focus must be specifically directed toward
the public self (Edelmann, 1987; Keltner & Buswell,
1997; Miller, 1995). To feel embarrassed an individual
must become aware of a discrepancy between public
aspects of the self, such as one’s appearance, and others’ evaluations (Edelmann, 1985; Miller, 1995). The
relevant identity goals concern one’s externally presented identity. Consistent with this theoretical conception, individual differences in the tendency to
become embarrassed correlates with public self-consciousness (Edelmann, 1985); in addition, in one
study, participants only reported feeling embarrassed
in the presence of real or imagined others (Tangney et
al., 1996). It is noteworthy that traditional accounts
used this public-private distinction to differentiate between shame and guilt, viewing shame as a public
emotion and guilt as a private one (e.g., Buss, 1980;
Darwin, 1872). However, researchers have asked participants to report the actual antecedents of their shame
and guilt experiences and discovered that both shame
and guilt can occur in response to public or private
elicitors (Tangney et al., 1996), although shame is
more commonly elicited in public contexts (Smith,
Webster, Parrott, & Eyre, 2002). Thus, we believe that
115

TRACY & ROBINS

Downloaded by [New York University] at 04:28 25 June 2015

shame and guilt can result from the activation of a public or private self-representation, whereas embarrassment is linked exclusively to the public self.12
Existing theories of embarrassment provide somewhat conflicting accounts of its precise cognitive antecedents (Edelmann, 1985; Keltner & Buswell, 1997;
Miller, 1995; Parrott & Smith, 1991; Sabini, Garvey,
& Hall, 2001; Tangney et al., 1996). Given the limited
consensus, our model restricts its claims to the few areas where there is agreement: Embarrassment requires
attentional focus on the public self, appraisals of identity-goal relevance and incongruence, and internal attributions. Our more controversial claim, that
embarrassment is less cognitively elaborated than guilt
or shame, requires further empirical support.
Two forms of pride: Achievement-oriented and
hubristic. According to our model, people feel pride
when their attention is focused on themselves, activating
public and/or private self-representations; when they appraise events as relevant to and congruent with identity
goals; and when they attribute the cause of events to
some internal factor, taking credit for the situation.13 Paralleling shame and guilt, stability and globality attributions differentiate between two forms of pride. Global
12

Lewis (2000) distinguished between embarrassment as conceptualized here and a form of embarrassment he labeled “embarrassment as
exposure,” which occurs in response to praise or any public attention.
Lewis noted that this latter form of embarrassment does not require any
negative evaluation of self, and unlike the former, it is not associated
with increases in cortisol levels (Lewis & Ramsay, 2002). We believe
that embarrassment as exposure may be better conceptualized as a generalized form of self-consciousness than as a form of embarrassment.
Consistent with this view, Miller (1995) argued that “awareness of
one’s social self alone does not cause [embarrassment] to occur. Instead, mature embarrassment seems to result from the acute realization
that one’s social self is imperiled and that others maybe judging one
negatively” (p. 326). Thus, we distinguish generalized self-consciousness from embarrassment, the latter of which seems to be an evolved
mechanism for appeasement following a social transgression and requires a comparatively complex self-evaluative process.
13
One seemingly contradictory example is the experience of vicarious pride. Consider the case of a person who feels pride while watching someone else win an athletic event. This could generate pride,
first, because the individual experiencing pride directly takes credit
for the outcome (e.g., as might the athlete’s coach). Second, the individual could experience pride because he or she includes the other
within his or her self-representations. For example, if the athlete represents the individual’s country in the Olympics, then the individual
might experience national pride because the event is congruent with
his or her ideal collective self-representations (e.g., “My nation is
good at sports”). Similarly, if the individual is the athlete’s parent, he
or she might experience pride because the event is congruent with his
or her ideal relational self-representations (e.g., “I’m a good father”).
Finally, the event could elicit pride because the individual has an empathic response toward the athlete (e.g., “That could have been me”),
which could occur even when the individual has no prior psychological connection to the athlete. These processes are likely to occur for
other self-conscious emotions such as embarrassment (e.g., the individual could feel embarrassed watching the athlete trip on the way to
picking up her medal).

116

pride in the self (“I’m proud of who I am”), which Lewis
(2000) referred to as hubris and Tangney et al. (1992) referred to as “alpha pride,” may result from attributions to
internal, stable causes. Conversely, a feeling of pride
based on specific achievements (“I’m proud of what I
did”) may result from attributions to internal, unstable
causes (Lewis, 2000; Tangney et al., 1992).
The conceptual distinction between these two forms
of pride is supported by evidence that the same emotion (pride) can lead to highly divergent outcomes. On
one hand, narcissistic hubris may contribute to aggression and hostility, interpersonal problems, relationship
conflict, and a host of self-destructive behaviors
(Bushman & Baumeister, 1998; Campbell, 1999;
Kernberg, 1975; Kohut, 1977; Morf & Rhodewalt,
2001; Wink, 1991). On the other hand, pride in one’s
achievements may promote positive behaviors in the
achievement domain (Weiner, 1985) and contribute to
prosocial investments and the development of a genuine and deep-rooted sense of self-esteem (Herrald &
Tomaka, 2002; Lazarus, 1991).
We have conducted several studies that provide empirical support for the distinction between achievement-oriented and hubristic pride. In one study, we
found that the two variants of pride have distinct
elicitors; attributing a hypothetical success to ability (a
global, stable cause) leads to greater feelings of superiority (i.e., hubristic pride) than does attributing the
same success to effort (a specific, unstable cause)
(Tracy & Robins, 2002). In another study, we analyzed
the semantic similarity among words that participants
used to label photos of individuals displaying the pride
expression. We found two distinct clusters, one reflecting achievement-oriented pride (including words such
as triumphant and achieving) and the other reflecting
hubristic words (e.g., haughty, egotistic, arrogant). In
a third study, participants wrote about actual pride experiences and rated the extent to which each of a set of
pride-related words described their feelings. A factor
analysis of their ratings revealed two independent factors: one included achievement-oriented pride words
such as confident, triumphant, and achieving, and the
other included hubristic words such as arrogant, superior, and cocky (Tracy & Robins, 2003b). Thus, there
is preliminary evidence for two forms of pride that are
semantically and experientially distinct.
In summary, our model integrates previous research
and theory to formulate a separate causal pathway
leading to each self-conscious emotion and explains
how these pathways fit within the broader set of cognitive processes necessary for the elicitation of the family of self-conscious emotions. In addition, our model
extends previous conceptions of shame and guilt to the
domain of positive self-conscious emotions by specifying separate causal pathways to two parallel forms of
pride (achievement oriented and hubristic). Finally,
the proposed model integrates theory and research on

TARGET ARTICLE

self-representations, self-focused attention, and
self-discrepancies with theory and research on appraisal models of emotion and the causal attribution
process. As a result, our model generates testable predictions about the cognitive antecedents of self-conscious emotions. In the next section, we demonstrate
how our model can be used to better understand a particular personality process, namely, narcissistic
self-esteem regulation.

Downloaded by [New York University] at 04:28 25 June 2015

An Application of the Model: The Case
of Narcissism
Prediction 11: Narcissistic individuals will engage
in appraisal processes that promote feelings of
hubristic pride and minimize shame. These processes
include a tendency to chronically focus attention on the
self; appraise positive events as identity-goal relevant
and congruent and negative events as identity-goal irrelevant and incongruent; and make internal, stable,
global attributions for success and external attributions
for failure.
Self-conscious emotions such as shame and
hubristic pride are assumed to fuel narcissistic self-esteem regulation (Robins, Tracy, & Shaver, 2001;
Wright, O’Leary, & Balkin, 1989). Thus, our model of
these emotions should provide a unique, process-oriented perspective on the self-regulatory system governing narcissistic personality processes. Our model’s
utility can be demonstrated by using it to gain insight
into an important personality dimension, narcissism
which has received considerable attention from self researchers (e.g., Morf & Rhodewalt, 2001).
Individuals with narcissistic tendencies report high
self-esteem but are thought to hold implicit negative
self-representations (e.g., Broucek, 1991; Kernberg,
1975; Morrison, 1989; Tracy & Robins, 2003a; Watson, Hickman, & Morris, 1996). In addition, these individuals are highly motivated to self-enhance and
self-aggrandize (John & Robins, 1994; Morf &
Rhodewalt, 2001), presumably because maintaining
biased self-representations allows them to prevent
their implicit low self-esteem from becoming explicit.
The coexistence of explicit positive and implicit negative self-representations, combined with a strong
self-enhancement motive, has important implications
for the self-conscious emotion process.
Narcissists, like to all individuals, regulate self-esteem by striving to increase pride and avoid shame.
Our model points to the reappraisals that likely facilitate this regulatory process. For example, to avoid
shame, individuals may appraise negative events as
identity-goal incongruent, externally caused, or internally caused but due to an unstable, specific aspect of
the self. Conversely, to increase pride individuals may
appraise positive events as identity-goal relevant and

internally caused. In fact, these regulation processes
may be the same cognitive mechanisms through which
self-enhancement processes take effect. The experience of both forms of pride enhances self-esteem, the
experience of shame diminishes self-esteem (Tangney
& Dearing, 2002), and one accepted definition of
self-esteem is “the balance between pride and shame
states in a person’s life, taking into account both duration and intensity” (Scheff, 1988, p. 399). Thus, our
model describes the mechanisms behind self-esteem
regulation. For narcissistic individuals, this regulatory
process functions in an extreme, even pathological,
manner. Regardless of the actual eliciting event and
circumstances, a narcissist will rigidly follow the regulatory pathways in the model that lead to hubristic
pride and away from shame.
From this perspective, narcissism should have a
powerful effect on each of the pathways in the model.
First, narcissism may promote excessive attentional
focus on the self. In fact, narcissists score higher on
projective measures of chronic self-focus (Emmons,
1987) and use more first-person singular pronouns (I,
me) in their speech (Raskin & Shaw, 1988). Chronic
self-focused attention will increase the narcissist’s vulnerability to all self-conscious emotions, making regulation (of shame and guilt) all the more important.
Second, narcissism may influence appraisals of
identity-goal relevance. Those who actively seek
self-enhancement opportunities may be prone to finding identity-relevant meaning in many positive events
and, consequently, experience frequent pride. For example, the narcissistic premed student might feel positive self-conscious emotions not only from a high score
on an exam but also from speaking in her class, talking to
a professor after class, proving herself smarter than a fellow classmate, and countless other events that can easily
be appraised as identity-goal relevant and congruent to a
self-enhancer. Narcissism may also influence the tendency to regulate self-conscious emotions through reappraisals. Narcissists may reappraise negative events
as irrelevant to identity goals by, for example, shifting
the importance of various identity goals (e.g., “It’s ok
that I failed my exam because I don’t want to be a doctor
anyway—I’d rather look cool to my friends”).
Third, narcissistic self-enhancement biases may
promote external attributions for failure. The narcissistic premed student is more likely to blame her professor than herself for failing an exam, and studies
suggest she may become angry and possibly even aggressive as a result (Bushman & Baumeister, 1998).
The “shame-rage spiral” observed in clinical research
has been noted to be particularly characteristic of narcissists (Lewis, 1971; Scheff, 1998). At an implicit
level, narcissists may be very similar to other individuals with low self-esteem, who tend to globalize failure (Brown & Dutton, 1995), which, in our model,
means experiencing shame. Thus, for a narcissist, in117

Downloaded by [New York University] at 04:28 25 June 2015

TRACY & ROBINS

ternalization of failure would be internalization of
global failure, leading to shame without any possibility of guilt. The only regulatory solution for these individuals is to externalize blame, and experience
anger and rage instead.14
Conversely, narcissists may be vigilant of opportunities to internalize positive events, taking credit for
successes whenever possible. Furthermore, their globalizing tendencies may encourage not only internal attributions but stable and global ones as well. For
example, after receiving a high score on her math
exam, the narcissist may think, “I’m smart and talented
at everything I do,” whereas a non-narcissistic person
may also make an internal attribution but think, “I’m
pretty good at math,” or even “I’m learning the material in this math class very well.” Interestingly, narcissists may make self-serving attributions even when
positive events are not actually internally
caused—narcissists tend to take credit for events that
may be caused by others (Farwell & Wohlwend-Lloyd,
1998). Part of the reason for these excessively global
and stable internal attributions may be that positive
self-representations are too essential to the narcissist to
be left to the whim of actual accomplishments. Indeed,
without these representations, narcissists would be
overwhelmed by shame and low self-esteem
(Kernberg, 1975). Thus, narcissists may regulate both
to avoid shame and to experience conscious feelings of
hubristic pride. If this is the case, we can surmise that
whereas achievement-oriented pride may enhance authentic self-esteem, hubristic pride may enhance narcissistic, inflated self-esteem.
In summary, the proposed model helps us conceptualize personality tendencies in terms of processes,
rather than by simply linking an individual-difference
construct to an outcome. For example, we have preliminary data showing that narcissistic individuals tend to
be prone to experiencing both forms of pride (Tracy &
Robins, 2004a), however few theories have outlined
the mechanisms that produce this emotional disposition. Our model suggests several possible,
nonmutually exclusive paths: Narcissism might promote chronic self-focused attention; it might promote
evaluations of identity-goal relevance and congruence
for positive events; or it might generate internal attributions for positive events. Any one, or all, of these
mediating mechanisms could account for the empirical
link. In this way, the model moves beyond predicting
simple correlations by also presenting a host of mediat14

The idea that implicit shame is the cause of narcissistic rage is
supported by studies of “Type A” coronary heart disease survivors.
These patients have been found to “harbor insecurities and in most
cases insufficient self-esteem … not immediately apparent to the
therapists or the participants themselves” (Friedman & Ulmer, 1984,
p. 167). Other research supports the idea that these hostile patients are
narcissistic: They tend to frequently use the words, I, me, and my in
conversations (Williams, 1988).

118

ing processes that might explain why some individuals
are prone to experience particular emotions. Similarly,
when a personality tendency does not show theoretically predicted links to emotion—for example, individuals who score high on measures of narcissism tend
not to report experiencing shame despite clinical theories that shame underlies the disorder—the model
points to several possible explanations. Narcissists
may not focus attention on the self when negative
events occur; they might deny that an event is incongruent with or even relevant to identity goals; or they
might make external attributions for negative events
and feel anger instead of shame.

Implications for Research on Self and
Emotion
In this article, we presented a comprehensive theoretical model of self-conscious emotions. This model
describes the cognitive processes that generate on-line,
momentary emotions and provides a framework for
conceptualizing how narcissism—a broad individual-difference variable—influences several aspects of
the self-conscious emotion process. We conclude by
discussing several implications of this model for research on the role of affect in self-processes.
Traditionally, research on the self and research on
emotion have been disconnected, stemming, perhaps,
from their divergent theoretical roots. Self researchers
began including affect in their models only within the
past few decades and even now rarely move beyond
noting that self-processes may be affect driven. These
researchers tend not to identify the specific emotions
that drive particular self-processes. Meanwhile, emotion researchers have focused on the biological underpinnings of basic emotions, causing them to downplay
complex psychological processes and to devote less attention to emotions that require an understanding of
the self—self-conscious emotions. As a whole, this divide has hurt research on the self, research on emotions, and most notably, research on topics that exist at
the interface between the two areas (e.g., self-esteem
regulation). The theoretical model proposed here attempts to integrate these two areas of research, and to
provide a potentially fruitful synthesis that suggests
several major directions for future research.
Our model generates testable hypotheses about the
on-line process of self-conscious emotion activation
and thus has important implications for future and extant research. Our model also can facilitate reinterpretation of previous research findings.
To better understand the functions and outcomes of
the emotions that mediate self-processes, researchers
must specify the exact emotions involved in these processes. For example, if self-enhancement increases
positive affect, is this because it causes people to feel

Downloaded by [New York University] at 04:28 25 June 2015

TARGET ARTICLE

joy, achievement-oriented pride, hubristic pride, or
some other positive emotion? From a discrete emotions perspective, these emotions will produce divergent behaviors, thoughts, and feelings, so
differentiating among them is meaningful and necessary. Using our model, self-enhancement researchers
could trace the process to a particular outcome emotion
and then empirically test whether that emotion is more
likely to be experienced than others. For example, do
people self-enhance to feel pride or a generalized positive affective state? To test this question empirically,
researchers need to move beyond assessing only broad
affective dimensions.
If researchers do begin to identify and assess specific emotions rather than rely on global categories
such as negative affect, the precision and predictive
power of our models may be increased. If we can focus
on the particular emotion that accounts for the relation
between two variables, the resultant correlation will be
stronger than one found using a composite of different
emotions, some relevant and some irrelevant. For example, if anger is the specific emotion that accounts for
the relation between a manipulated ego threat and outcome aggression, anger feelings may be a significant
mediator of this relation whereas negative affect averaged across a set of emotions may not be. In a recent
study on this effect, Twenge, Baumeister, Tice, and
Stucke (2001) linked ego threats to aggression but
failed to find a mediation effect of generalized negative affect. Our model specifies a more precise prediction: Shame externalized into anger will significantly
mediate the threat-aggression relation.
Indeed, our model has other implications for the
large body of experimental research on reactions to
feedback. Numerous studies have shown that, following an ego threat, low self-esteem individuals tend to
experience negative affect and withdraw from the task
(Baumeister, Tice, & Hutton, 1989; Brown & Dutton,
1995). From a functionalist perspective, this withdrawal can be interpreted as a behavioral outcome of
shame (Lewis, 1971; Lindsay-Hartz, 1984). Thus, the
negative affect reported by individuals with low
self-esteem may more specifically reflect feelings of
shame, and the outcome behaviors may be part of a coordinated functional response. If failure represents a
stable, global, shortcoming of the self, the adaptive solution is to withdraw and avoid repeated attempts at
success or social contact, which might further reveal
the self’s inadequacies. Supporting this account,
Brown and Marshall (2001) found that most of the
shared variance between self-esteem and affect is accounted for by self-conscious emotions, specifically
shame and pride.
Individuals with defensive or contingent self-esteem, however, react very differently to negative feedback. As previously mentioned, rather than quietly
disengage, these individuals become angry, hostile,

and even aggressive following failure (Bushman &
Baumeister, 1998; Kernis, Cornell, Sun, Berry, &
Harlow, 1993). Although researchers rarely question
the mechanism behind this outcome, it certainly warrants attention. Individuals with contingent self-esteem are those who base feelings of self-worth entirely
on feedback from others, so negative feedback should
reduce self-esteem and promote shame, not anger. The
fact that anger occurs instead implies a regulatory process, demanding further explanation. Earlier, we argued that instead of blaming themselves for failure and
consciously experiencing shame, narcissists (who tend
to have contingent self-esteem) blame others and feel
the anger and hostility that follow from an external attribution. This regulatory process may be the explanation for the angry and aggressive response seen in these
studies. Thus, by specifying separate causal pathways
for different emotions, our model explains why stable
individual differences (e.g., low self-esteem vs. narcissistic self-esteem) promote different reactions to the
same negative feedback, and how distinct emotions
mediate these processes.
To take another prominent example from the self
literature, our model has important implications for
dominant accounts of the role of affect in self-regulatory processes. As we explained earlier, Carver and
Scheier (1998) have argued that a discrepancy between
a current self-state and a goal state results in negative
affect. We have built on their model to argue that discrepancies between current and ideal states generate
specifically shame or guilt; in other words, distinct
negative self-conscious emotions. This more precise
prediction is possible because, in our model, the locus
attribution is critical: Internal attributions are the appraisals that determine whether basic or self-conscious
emotions occur. Even in Carver’s (2001) most recent
model, there is no distinction made between internal
and external attributions. As a result, movement toward a self-regulatory goal (i.e., reduction of a discrepancy) is assumed to produce a set of high-activation
positive emotions, including elation, excitement, and
joy, regardless of whether the discrepancy reduction is
attributed to internal or external causes. In contrast, our
model specifies that internal attributions for achievement generate achievement-oriented or hubristic pride
(depending on the globality and stability of the internal
attribution), but external attributions for the same outcome produce joy instead. Thus, our model generates
predictions with a high degree of fidelity when individuals self-regulate to achieve identity-relevant goals.
As with our reinterpretation of the findings of feedback manipulation studies, this reinterpretation may
improve our understanding of the behavioral outcomes
of self-regulation. Carver and Scheier (1998) argued
that discrepancies motivate behaviors that produce
faster progress toward a goal state (i.e., increased effort
to achieve goals). When we view the negative affect
119

Downloaded by [New York University] at 04:28 25 June 2015

TRACY & ROBINS

that is generated by these discrepancies as guilt, we can
integrate functionalist theories of emotions into our interpretation and explain why discrepancies motivate
progress-oriented behaviors: Guilt functions to promote reparative action (Barrett, 1995; Lindsay-Hartz,
1984; Tangney, 1991). Furthermore, when discrepancies motivate withdrawal and avoidance rather than increased effort toward reducing the discrepancy, we can
make predictions about why this might be the case.
From a functionalist perspective, we need not assume
that the overarching theory is wrong; instead, we can
hypothesize that shame, rather than guilt (and rather
than overly broad negative affect), is the mediating
emotion in such cases.
One notable exception to the general absence of a
discrete emotions perspective in self research is Higgins’ (1987) theoretical work on self-discrepancies.
As mentioned earlier, Higgins articulated distinct sets
of negative emotions that result from discrepancies
between different self-schemas. For example, a discrepancy between one’s actual self and ought self was
hypothesized to produce specifically anxiety-related
emotions, such as fear and guilt, rather than broad
negative affect. More recently, Higgins argued that
researchers must now ask the “second-generation
question” stemming from his work: Under what conditions do self-discrepancies lead to predicted distinctive emotional patterns (Higgins, 1999)? Our
proposed model builds on Higgins’ original conception that different emotions are related to different
self-processes and responds to his second-generation
call by providing a deeper understanding of the processes involved.
Finally, our model can provide an explanatory
framework for conceptualizing cultural differences in
emotion. A large body of research suggests that culture has a profound influence on emotions. The impact of culture is likely to be particularly pronounced
for self-conscious emotions, which require evaluations of a self that is, at least in part, shaped by culture. Research suggests that a wide range of
self-evaluative processes vary in important ways
across cultures (Heine, Lehman, Markus, &
Kitayama, 1999). For example, Markus and
Kitayama (1991) argued that individuals from
collectivistic cultures tend to hold interdependent
self-construals, viewing the self as embedded within
and dependent on a larger social context, whereas
those from individualistic cultures tend to hold more
independent self-construals, viewing the self as primarily separate from the social context. According to
Markus and Kitayama, these cultural differences in
self-construals lead to cultural differences in emotion. Specifically, “other-focused” emotions such as
shame may be more commonly experienced and lead
to greater positive outcomes in individuals with interdependent views of self, whereas “ego-focused” emo120

tions such as pride may be more commonly experienced and self-enhancing for those with independent
views of self (see also, Eid & Diener, 2001; Menon &
Shweder, 1994; Scherer & Wallbott, 1994).
However, despite these important cultural differences, we believe that the basic processes described
by our model—the particular antecedent appraisals
that elicit different emotions—generalize across cultures. In other words, although a person from a
collectivistic culture may feel shame more frequently
than a person from an individualistic culture, our
model predicts that the same set of appraisals and attributions elicits shame in both people. Supporting
this idea, Scherer and Wallbott (1994) studied 37 cultures and found considerable cross-cultural similarities in the appraisal processes that generated and
distinguished among emotions. Nonetheless, culture
may exert a strong influence on the way that individuals appraise emotion-eliciting events, and these cultural differences in appraisal can account for
differences in the prevalence of particular emotions
(Mesquita, 2001).
Our model provides the basis for making predictions about the appraisal processes that mediate cultural differences in emotion. A person from a
collectivistic culture, who presumably has an interdependent self-construal, may not appraise an individual achievement as identity-goal congruent unless
this achievement reflects well on his family, too. As a
result, the same event—for example, making an intelligent comment in class that draws attention from others—may lead to divergent emotions depending on
culture. For a person from an individualistic culture,
who presumably has an independent self-construal,
this event will likely be appraised as congruent with
the culturally determined identity goal of appearing
smart to those around her. If she also appraises the
event as internally caused, she will experience pride.
In contrast, an individual with a more interdependent
self-construal may feel shame instead of pride, because he might appraise this event as relevant to the
culturally determined identity goal of fitting in with
those around him, and as incongruent with this goal.
Other cultural differences in appraisal processes—such as the tendency for people from individualistic cultures to make more self-serving
attributions for success and failure than people from
collectivistic cultures (Heine et al., 1999; Kitayama,
Takagi, & Matsumoto, 1995)—will produce similar
differences in emotions. Thus, culture may affect how
frequently particular emotions occur, by influencing
individuals’ propensity to make particular appraisals
(Mesquita & Frijda, 1992). In summary, our model
predicts that cultures differ in the prevalence and consequences of self-conscious emotions, but not in the
cognitive processes that generate and distinguish
among them.

TARGET ARTICLE

Downloaded by [New York University] at 04:28 25 June 2015

Conclusion
Although all emotions can involve the self, only
self-conscious emotions cannot occur independently
of elaborate self-processes. Using the proposed model,
we can ask new questions about the causes of self-conscious emotions in various individuals. For example,
did Willy Loman succumb to suicide because he could
no longer distract himself from attentional focus on the
self? Did Lady Macbeth see spots of blood after realizing that murder was incongruent with her identity goal
to be a good person? Was Oedipus’ shame the result of
an internal, stable, and global attribution for his father’s death and his incestuous relationship with his
mother? Did Narcissus appraise his current public
self-representation as congruent with ideal public
self-representations? We leave these questions to literary scholars, but we hope similar ones will be asked of
the emotional and self-processes studied in psychological research.

Notes
Jessica L. Tracy was supported by a predoctoral fellowship from National Institute of Mental Health
Grant T32 MH2006. We thank Jennifer Beer, Robin
Edelstein, Simona Ghetti, Erik Noftle, Jennifer Pals,
Phil Shaver, Gina Sutin, and Kali Trzesniewski for
their helpful comments on this article.
Jessica L. Tracy, University of California, Department of Psychology, Davis, CA 95616–8686. E-mail:
jltracy@ucdavis.edu

References
Bargh, J. A., & Chartrand, T. L. (1999). The unbearable automaticity
of being. American Psychologist, 54, 462–479.
Barrett, K. C. (1995). A functionalist approach to shame and guilt. In
J. P. Tangney & K. W. Fischer (Eds.), Self-conscious emotions:
The psychology of shame, guilt, embarrassment, and pride (pp.
25–63). New York: Guilford.
Barrett, K. C., & Campos, J. (1987). Perspectives on emotional development II: A functionalist approach to emotions. In J. D.
Osofsky (Ed.), Handbook of infant development (2nd ed., pp.
555–578). New York: Wiley.
Batson, C. D. (1987). Prosocial motivation: Is it ever truly altruistic?
In L. Berkowitz (Ed.), Advances in experimental social psychology (Vol. 20, pp. 65–122). New York: Academic Press.
Baumeister, R. F., Stillwell, A. M., & Heatherton, T. F. (1994). Guilt:
An interpersonal approach. Psychological Bulletin, 115,
243–267.
Baumeister, R. F., Tice, D. M., & Hutton, D. G. (1989). Self-presentational motivations and personality differences in self-esteem.
Journal of Personality, 57, 547–579.
Beer, J. S., Roberts, N. A., Werner, K. H., Scabini, D., Levenson, R.
W., & Knight, R. T. (2002, February). The role of self-conscious
emotion in self-regulation. Paper presented at the annual convention of the Society for Personality and Social Psychology,
Savannah, GA.

Broucek, F. J. (1991). Shame and the self. New York: Guilford.
Brown, J., & Weiner, B. (1984). Affective consequences of ability
versus effort ascriptions: Controversies, resolutions, and quandaries. Journal of Educational Psychology, 76, 146–158.
Brown, J. D. (1998). The self. New York: McGraw-Hill.
Brown, J. D., & Dutton, K. A. (1995). The thrill of victory, the complexity of defeat: Self-esteem and people’s emotional reactions
to success and failure. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 68, 712–722.
Brown, J. D., & Marshall, M. A. (2001). Self-esteem and emotion:
Some thoughts about feelings. Personality and Social Psychology Bulletin, 27, 575–584.
Bushman, B. J., & Baumeister, R. F. (1998). Threatened egotism,
narcissism, self-esteem, and direct and displaced aggression:
Does self-love or self-hate lead to violence? Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 75, 219–229.
Buss, A. H. (1980). Self-consciousness and social anxiety. San Francisco: Freeman.
Buss, A. H. (2001). Psychological dimensions of the self. Thousand
Oaks, CA: Sage.
Campbell, W. K. (1999). Narcissism and romantic attraction. Journal
of Personality and Social Psychology, 77, 1254–1270.
Campos, J. J. (1995). Foreword. In J. P. Tangney & K. W. Fischer
(Eds.), Self-conscious emotions: The psychology of shame,
guilt, embarrassment, and pride (pp. ix–xi). New York:
Guilford.
Campos, J. J., Barrett, K. C., Lamb, M. E., Goldsmith, H. H., &
Stenberg, C. (1983). Socioemotional development. In M. M.
Haith & J. J. Campos (Eds.), Handbook of child psychology:
Vol. 2. Infancy and developmental psychobiology (4th ed., pp.
783–915). New York: Wiley.
Carver, C. S. (2001). Affect and the functional bases of behavior: On
the dimensional structure of affective experience. Personality
and Social Psychology Review, 5, 345–356.
Carver, C. S., & Scheier, M. F. (1998). On the self-regulation of behavior. New York: Cambridge University Press.
Cohen, J. L., Dowling, N., Bishop, G., & Maney, W. J. (1985). Causal
attributions: Effects of self-focused attentiveness and self-esteem feedback. Personality and Social Psychology Bulletin, 11,
369–378.
Cooley, C. H. (1902). Human nature and the social order. New York:
Scribner’s.
Covington, M. V., & Omelich, C. L. (1981). As failures mount: Affective and cognitive consequences of ability demotion in the
classroom. Journal of Educational Psychology, 73, 796–808.
Csikszentmihalyi, M. (1990). Flow: The psychology of optimal experience. New York: Harper & Row.
Darwin, C. (1872). The expression of the emotions in man and animals (3rd ed.). New York: Oxford University Press.
Davidson, R. J. (2001). The neural circuitry of emotion and affective
style: Prefrontal cortex and amygdala contributions. Social Science Information, 40, 11–37.
de Waal, F. B. M. (1989). Chimpanzee politics: Power and sex
among apes. Baltimore: Johns Hopkins University Press.
Doosje, B., Branscombe, N. R., Spears, R., & Manstead, A. S. R.
(1998). Guilty by association: When one’s group has a negative
history. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 75,
872–886.
Duval, S., & Wicklund, R. A. (1972). A theory of objective
self-awareness. New York: Academic.
Duval, S., & Wicklund, R. A. (1973). Effects of objective self-awareness on attribution of causality. Journal of Experimental Social
Psychology, 9, 17–31.
Edelmann, R. J. (1985). Individual differences in embarrassment:
Self-consciousness, self-monitoring, and embarrassability.
Personality and Individual Differences, 6, 223–230.
Edelmann, R. J. (1987). The psychology of embarrassment.
Chichester, England: Wiley.

121

Downloaded by [New York University] at 04:28 25 June 2015

TRACY & ROBINS
Eid, M., & Diener, E. (2001). Norms for experiencing emotions
in different cultures: Inter- and intranational differences.
Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 81,
869–885.
Ekman, P. (1992a). Are there basic emotions? Psychological Review,
99, 550–553.
Ekman, P. (1992b). An argument for basic emotions. Cognition and
Emotion, 6, 169–200.
Ekman, P. (1994). All emotions are basic. In P. Ekman & R. J.
Davidson (Eds.), The nature of emotion: Fundamental questions (pp. 15–19). New York: Oxford University Press.
Ekman, P. (2003). Emotions revealed. New York: Times Books.
Ekman, P., & Friesen, W. V. (1975). Unmasking the face: A guide to
recognizing emotions from facial clues. New York: Prentice
Hall.
Ekman, P., Levenson, R. W., & Friesen, W. V. (1983). Autonomic
nervous system activity distinguishes among emotions. Science, 221, 1208–1210.
Ekman, P., & Rosenberg, E. L. (1997). What the face reveals: Basic
and applied studies of spontaneous expression using the Facial
Action Coding System (FACS). New York: Oxford University
Press.
Ellsworth, P. C., & Smith, C. A. (1988). Shades of joy: Patterns of appraisal differentiating pleasant emotions. Cognition and Emotion, 2, 301–331.
Emmons, R. A. (1987). Narcissism: Theory and measurement. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 52, 11–17.
Farwell, L., & Wohlwend-Lloyd, R. (1998). Narcissistic processes:
Optimistic expectations, favorable self-evaluations, and
self-enhancing attributions. Journal of Personality, 66, 65–84.
Feiring, C., Taska, L., & Lewis, M. (2002). Adjustment following
sexual abuse discovery: The role of shame and attributional
style. Developmental Psychology, 38, 79–92.
Fenigstein, A., & Levine, M. P. (1984). Self-attention, concept activation, and the causal self. Journal of Experimental Social Psychology, 20, 231–245.
Ferguson, T. J., Stegge, H., & Damhuis, I. (1991). Children’s understanding of guilt and shame. Child Development, 62, 827–839.
Fischer, K. W., & Tangney, J. P. (1995). Self-conscious emotions and
the affect revolution: Framework and overview. In J. P.
Tangney & K. W. Fischer (Eds.), Self-conscious emotions: The
psychology of shame, guilt, embarrassment, and pride (pp.
3–24). New York: Guilford.
Friedman, M., & Ulmer, D. (1984). Treating Type A behavior and
your heart. New York: Knopf.
Frijda, N. H. (1987). Emotion, cognitive structure, and action tendency. Cognition and Emotion, 1, 115–143.
Gehm, T., & Scherer, K. R. (1988). Relating situation evaluation to
emotion differentiation: Nonmetric analysis of cross-cultural
questionnaire data. In K. R. Scherer (Ed.), Facets of emotion:
Recent research (pp. 61–77). Hillsdale, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum
Associates, Inc.
Gilbert, P. (1997). The evolution of social attractiveness and its role
in shame, humiliation, guilt and therapy. British Journal of
Medical Psychology, 70, 113–147.
Gilbert, P. (1998). What is shame? Some core issues and controversies. In P. Gilbert & B. Andrews (Eds.), Shame: Interpersonal
behavior, psychopathology, and culture (pp. 3–38). Oxford,
England: Oxford University Press.
Goffman, E. (1955). On face-work: An analysis of ritual elements in
social interaction. Psychiatry: Journal for the Study of Interpersonal Processes, 18, 213–231.
Graham, S. (1988). Children’s developing understanding of the motivational role of affect: An attributional analysis. Cognitive Development, 3, 71–88.
Graham, S., & Weiner, B. (1986). From an attributional theory of
emotion to developmental psychology: A round-trip ticket? Social Cognition, 4, 152–179.

122

Greenwald, A. G. (1980). The totalitarian ego: Fabrication and revision of personal history. American Psychologist, 35,
603–618.
Harder, D. W. (1995). Shame and guilt assessment, and relationships
of shame- and guilt-proneness to psychopathology. In J. P.
Tangney & K. W. Fischer (Eds.), Self-conscious emotions: The
psychology of shame, guilt, embarrassment, and pride (pp.
368–392). New York: Guilford.
Harder, D. W., Cutler, L., & Rockart, L. (1992). Assessment of
shame and guilt and their relationships to psychopathology.
Journal of Personality Assessment, 59, 584–604.
Hart, D., & Karmel, M. P. (1996). Self-awareness and self-knowledge in humans, apes, and monkeys. In A. E. Russon, K. A.
Bard, & S. T. Parker (Eds.), Reaching into thought: The minds of
the great apes (pp. 325–347). Cambridge, England: Cambridge
University Press.
Harvey, J. H., & Weary, G. (1984). Current issues in attribution theory and research. Annual Review of Psychology, 35, 427–459.
Hayes, C. (1951). The ape in our house. New York: Harper &
Brothers.
Hébert, R. (2002, April). The future is here: Innovative training for
emotion researchers. APS Observer, 15, 1–18.
Heckhausen, H. (1984). Emergent achievement behavior: Some
early developments. In J. Nicholls (Ed.), Advances in motivation and achievement: Vol. 3. The development of achievement
motivation (pp. 1–32). Greenwich, CT: JAI.
Heider, F. (1958). The psychology of interpersonal relations. New
York: Wiley.
Heine, S. J., Lehman, D. R., Markus, H. R., & Kitayama, S. (1999). Is
there a universal need for positive self-regard? Psychological
Review, 106, 766–794.
Herrald, M. M., & Tomaka, J. (2002). Patterns of emotion-specific
appraisal, coping, and cardiovascular reactivity during an ongoing emotional episode. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 83, 434–450.
Higgins, E. T. (1987). Self-discrepancy: A theory relating self and affect. Psychological Review, 94, 319–340.
Higgins, E. T. (1999). When do self-discrepancies have specific relations to emotions? The second-generation question of Tangney,
Niedenthal, Covert, and Barlow (1998). Journal of Personality
and Social Psychology, 77, 1313–1317.
Izard, C. E. (1971). The face of emotion. East Norwalk, CT:
Appleton-Century-Crofts.
Izard, C. E. (1992). Basic emotions, relations among emotions, and
emotion-cognition relations. Psychological Review, 99,
561–565.
Izard, C. E., Ackerman, B. P., & Schultz, D. (1999). Independent
emotions and consciousness: Self-consciousness and dependent
emotions. In J. A. Singer & P. Singer (Eds.), At play in the fields
of consciousness: Essays in honor of Jerome L. Singer (pp.
83–102). Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates, Inc.
Jagacinski, C. M., & Nicholls, J. G. (1984). Conceptions of ability
and related affects in task involvement and ego involvement.
Journal of Educational Psychology, 76, 909–919.
James, W. (1890). The principles of psychology. Cambridge, MA:
Harvard University Press.
John, O. P., & Robins, R. W. (1994). Accuracy and bias in self-perception: Individual differences in self-enhancement and the role
of narcissism. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology,
66, 206–219.
Johnson-Laird, P. N., & Oatley, K. (1989). The language of emotions: An analysis of a semantic field. Cognition and Emotion, 3,
81–123.
Kappas, A. (2001). A metaphor is a metaphor is a metaphor: Exorcising the homunculus from appraisal theory. In K. R. Scherer,
A. Schorr, & T. Johnstone (Eds.), Appraisal processes in emotion: Theory, methods, research (pp. 157–172). New York: Oxford University Press.

Downloaded by [New York University] at 04:28 25 June 2015

TARGET ARTICLE
Keltner, D. (1995). Signs of appeasement: Evidence for the distinct
displays of embarrassment, amusement, and shame. Journal of
Personality and Social Psychology, 68, 441–454.
Keltner, D., & Buswell, B. N. (1996). Evidence for the distinctness of
embarrassment, shame, and guilt: A study of recalled antecedents and facial expressions of emotion. Cognition and Emotion,
10, 155–171.
Keltner, D., & Buswell, B. N. (1997). Embarrassment: Its distinct
form and appeasement functions. Psychological Bulletin, 122,
250–270.
Keltner, D., & Harker, L. (1998). The forms and functions of the nonverbal signal of shame. In P. Gilbert & B. Andrews (Eds.),
Shame: Interpersonal behavior, psychopathology, and culture
(pp. 78–98). Oxford, England: Oxford University Press.
Kemeny, M. E. (2002, March). The impact of threats to social self on
cognition, emotion, physiology and health. Paper presented at
the Department of Psychology, University of California, Davis.
Kernis, M. H., Cornell, D. P., Sun, C., Berry, A., & Harlow, T.
(1993). There’s more to self-esteem than whether it is high or
low: The importance of stability of self-esteem. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 65, 1190–1204.
Kernberg, O. F. (1975). Borderline conditions and pathological narcissism. New York: Aronson.
Kitayama, S., Markus, H. R., & Matsumoto, H. (1995). Culture, self,
and emotion: A cultural perspective on “self-conscious” emotions. In J. P. Tangney & K. W. Fischer (Eds.), Self-conscious
emotions: The psychology of shame, guilt, embarrassment, and
pride (pp. 439–464). New York: Guilford.
Kitayama, S., Takagi, H., & Matsumoto, H. (1995). Causal attribution of success and failure: Cultural psychology of the Japanese
self. Japanese Psychological Review, 38, 247–280.
Kochanska, G., Gross, J. N., Lin, M., & Nichols, K. E. (2002). Guilt
in young children: Development, determinants, and relations
with a broader system of standards. Child Development, 73,
461–482.
Kohut, H. (1977). The restoration of the self. New York: International Universities Press.
Lazarus, R. S. (1991). Emotion and adaptation. New York: Oxford
University Press.
LeDoux, J. E. (1996). The emotional brain: The mysterious underpinnings of emotional life. New York: Simon & Schuster.
Leith, K. P., & Baumeister, R. F. (1998). Empathy, shame, guilt,
and narratives of interpersonal conflicts: Guilt-prone people
are better at perspective taking. Journal of Personality, 66,
1–37.
Lewis, H. B. (1971). Shame and guilt in neurosis. New York: International Universities Press.
Lewis, M. (1995). Embarrassment: The emotion of self-exposure and
evaluation. In J. P. Tangney & K. W. Fischer (Eds.), Self-conscious emotions: The psychology of shame, guilt, embarrassment, and pride (pp. 198–218). New York: Guilford.
Lewis, M. (2000). Self-conscious emotions: Embarrassment, pride,
shame, and guilt. In M. Lewis & J. M. Haviland-Jones (Eds.),
Handbook of emotions (2nd ed., pp. 623–636). New York:
Guilford.
Lewis, M., Alessandri, S. M., & Sullivan, M. W. (1992). Differences
in shame and pride as a function of children’s gender and task
difficulty. Child Development, 63, 630–638.
Lewis, M., & Ramsay, D. (2002). Cortisol response to embarrassment and shame. Child Development, 73, 1034–1045.
Lewis, M., Sullivan, M. W., Stanger, C., & Weiss, M. (1989). Self development and self-conscious emotions. Child Development,
60, 146–156.
Levenson, R. W. (1999). The intrapersonal functions of emotion.
Cognition and Emotion, 13(5), 481–504.
Levenson, R. W., Carstensen, L. L., Friesen, W. V., & Ekman, P.
(1991). Emotion, physiology, and expression in old age. Psychology and Aging, 6, 28–35.

Lindsay-Hartz, J. (1984). Contrasting experiences of shame and
guilt. American Behavioral Scientist, 27, 689–704.
Markus, H., & Nurius, P. (1986). Possible selves. American Psychologist, 41, 954–969.
Markus, H. R., & Kitayama, S. (1991). Culture and the self: Implications for cognition, emotion, and motivation. Psychological Review, 98, 224–253.
Menon, U., & Shweder, R. A. (1994). Kali’s tongue: Cultural psychology and the power of shame in Orissa, India. In S. Kitayama
& H. R. Markus (Eds.), Emotion and culture: Empirical studies
of mutual influence (pp. 241–282). Washington, DC: American
Psychological Association.
Mesquita, B. (2001). Emotions in collectivistic and individualistic
contexts. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 80,
68–74.
Mesquita, B., & Frijda, N. H. (1992). Cultural variations in emotions: A review. Psychological Bulletin, 112, 179–204.
Miller, R. S. (1995). Embarrassment and social behavior. In J. P.
Tangney & K. W. Fischer (Eds.), Self-conscious emotions: The
psychology of shame, guilt, embarrassment, and pride (pp.
322-339). New York: Guilford.
Miller, S. B. (1988). Humiliation and shame: Comparing two affect
states as indicators of narcissistic stress. Bulletin of the
Menninger Clinic, 52, 40–51.
Morf, C. C., & Rhodewalt, F. (2001). Unraveling the paradoxes of
narcissism: A dynamic self-regulatory processing model. Psychological Inquiry, 12, 177–196.
Morrison, A. P. (1989). Shame: The underside of narcissism.
Hillsdale, NJ: Analytic.
Mosquera, P. M., Manstead, A. S. R., & Fischer, A. H. (2000). The
role of honor-related values in the elicitation, experience, and
communication of pride, shame, and anger: Spain and the Netherlands compared. Personality & Social Psychology Bulletin,
26, 833–844.
Nesse, R. M. (1990). Evolutionary explanations of emotions. Human
Nature, 1, 261–289.
Niedenthal, P. M., Tangney, J. P., & Gavanski, I. (1994). “If only I
weren’t” versus “If only I hadn’t”: Distinguishing shame and
guilt in conterfactual thinking. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 67, 585–595.
Ortony, A., & Turner, T. J. (1990). What’s basic about basic emotions? Psychological Review, 97, 315–331.
Panksepp, J. (1992). A critical role for “affective neuroscience” in resolving what is basic about basic emotions. Psychological Review, 99, 554–560.
Panksepp, J. (1998). Affective neuroscience: The foundations of human and animal emotions. New York: Oxford University Press.
Parrott, W. G., & Smith, S. F. (1991). Embarrassment: Actual vs. typical cases, classical vs. prototypical representations. Cognition
and Emotion, 5, 467–488.
Paulhus, D. L. (1998). Interpersonal and intrapsychic adaptiveness of
trait self-enhancement: A mixed blessing? Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 74, 1197–1208.
Peterson, C. (1991). The meaning and measurement of explanatory
style. Psychological Inquiry, 2, 1–10.
Raskin, R., & Shaw, R. (1988). Narcissism and the use of personal
pronouns. Journal of Personality, 56, 393–404.
Retzinger, S. M. (1987). Resentment and laughter: Video studies of
the shame-rage spiral. In H. B. Lewis (Ed.), The role of shame in
symptom formation (pp. 151–181). Hillsdale, NJ: Lawrence
Erlbaum Associates, Inc.
Robins, R. W., & Beer, J. S. (2001). Positive illusions about the self:
Short-term benefits and long-term costs. Journal of Personality
and Social Psychology, 80, 340–352.
Robins, R. W., Norem, J. K., & Cheek, J. M. (1999). Naturalizing the
self. In L. A. Pervin & O. P. John (Eds.), Handbook of personality: Theory and research (2nd ed., pp. 443–477). New York:
Guilford.

123

Downloaded by [New York University] at 04:28 25 June 2015

TRACY & ROBINS
Robins, R. W., Spranca, M. D., & Mendelsohn, G. A. (1996). The actor-observer effect revisited: Effects of individual differences and
repeated social interactions on actor and observer attributions.
Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 71, 375–389.
Robins, R. W., Tracy, J. L., & Shaver, P. R. (2001). Shamed into
self-love: Dynamics, roots, and functions of narcissism. Psychological Inquiry, 12, 230–236.
Roseman, I. J. (1991). Appraisal determinants of discrete emotions.
Cognition and Emotion, 5, 161–200.
Roseman, I. J. (2001). A model of appraisal in the emotion system:
Integrating theory, research, and applications. In K. R. Scherer
& A. Schorr (Eds.), Appraisal processes in emotion: Theory,
methods, research (pp. 68–91). New York: Oxford University
Press.
Rozin, P., & Cohen, A. B. (2003). High frequency of facial expressions corresponding to confusion, concentration, and worry in
an analysis of naturally occurring facial expressions of Americans. Emotion, 3, 68–75.
Russell, D., & McAuley, E. (1986). Causal attributions, causal dimensions, and affective reactions to success and failure. Journal
of Personality and Social Psychology, 50, 1174–1185.
Russon, A. E., & Galdikas, B. M. F. (1993). Imitation in free-ranging
rehabilitant orangutans (Pongo pygmaeus). Journal of Comparative Psychology, 107, 147–161.
Sabini, J., Garvey, B., & Hall, A. L. (2001). Shame and embarrassment revisited. Personality and Social Psychology Bulletin, 27,
104–117.
Scheff, T. J. (1988). Shame and conformity: The deference-emotion
system. American Sociological Review, 53, 395–406.
Scheff, T. J. (1998). Shame in the labeling of mental illness. In P.
Gilbert & B. Andrews (Eds.), Shame: Interpersonal behavior,
psychopathology, and culture (pp. 191–205). Oxford, England:
Oxford University Press.
Scheff, T. J., Retzinger, S. M., & Ryan, M. T. (1989). Crime, violence, and
self-esteem: Review and proposals. In A. M. Mecca, N. J. Smelser,
& J. Vasconcellos (Eds.), The social importance of self-esteem (pp.
165–199). Berkeley: University of California Press.
Scheier, M. F., & Carver, C. S. (1977). Self-focused attention and the
experience of emotion: Attraction, repulsion, elation, and depression. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 35, 625–636.
Scherer, K. R. (1994). Emotion serves to decouple stimulus and response. In P. Ekman & R. J. Davidson (Eds.), The nature of emotions: Fundamental questions (pp. 127–130). New York: Oxford University Press.
Scherer, K. R. (2001). Appraisal considered as a process of multilevel sequential checking. In K. R. Scherer, A. Schorr, & T.
Johnstone (Eds.), Appraisal processes in emotion: Theory,
methods, research (pp. 92–120). New York: Oxford University Press.
Scherer, K. R. & Wallbott, H. G. (1994). Evidence for university and
cultural variation of differential emotion response pattern. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 66, 310–328.
Schore, A. N. (1998). Early shame experiences and infant brain development. In P. Gilbert & B. Andrews (Eds.), Shame: Interpersonal behavior, psychopathology, and culture (pp. 57–77). Oxford, England: Oxford University Press.
Sedikides, C., & Skowronski, J. J. (1997). The symbolic self in evolutionary context. Personality and Social Psychology Review, 1,
80–102.
Shaver, P., Schwartz, J., Kirson, D., & O’Connor, C. (1987). Emotion
knowledge: Further exploration of a prototype approach. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 52, 1061–1086.
Smith, C. A., & Ellsworth, P. C. (1985). Patterns of cognitive appraisal in emotion. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 48, 813–838.
Smith, C. A., & Kirby, L. D. (2001). Toward delivering on the promise of appraisal theory. In K. R. Scherer & A. Schorr (Eds.), Ap-

124

praisal processes in emotion: Theory, methods, research (pp.
121–138). New York: Oxford University.
Smith, C. A., & Lazarus, R. S. (1993). Appraisal components, core
relational themes, and the emotions. Cognition and Emotion, 7,
233–269.
Smith, H. S., Webster, J. M., Parrott, W. G., & Eyre, H. L. (2002). The
role of public exposure in moral and nonmoral shame and guilt.
Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 83, 138–159.
Stipek, D. (1995). The development of pride and shame in toddlers.
In J. P. Tangney & K. W. Fischer (Eds.), Self-conscious emotions: The psychology of shame, guilt, embarrassment, and
pride (pp. 237–254). New York: Guilford.
Stipek, D. J. (1983). A developmental analysis of pride and shame.
Human Development, 26, 42–54.
Tangney, J. P. (1991). Moral affect: The good, the bad, and the ugly.
Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 61, 598–607.
Tangney, J. P., Burggraf, S. A., & Wagner, P. E. (1995).
Shame-proneness, guilt-proneness, and psychological symptoms. In J. P. Tangney & K. W. Fischer (Eds.), Self-conscious
emotions: The psychology of shame, guilt, embarrassment, and
pride (pp. 343–367). New York: Guilford.
Tangney, J. P., & Dearing, R. L. (2002). Shame and guilt. New York:
Guilford.
Tangney, J. P., Dearing, R. L., Wagner, P. E., & Gramzow, R. (2000).
The Test of Self-Conscious Affect (TOSCA-3). Fairfax, VA:
George Mason University.
Tangney, J. P., & Fischer, K. W. (Eds.). (1995). Self-conscious emotions: The psychology of shame, guilt, embarrassment, and
pride. New York: Guilford.
Tangney, J. P., Miller, R. S., Flicker, L., & Barlow, D. H. (1996). Are
shame, guilt, and embarrassment distinct emotions? Journal of
Personality and Social Psychology, 70, 1256–1269.
Tangney, J. P., Niedenthal, P. M., Covert, M. V., & Barlow, D. H.
(1998). Are shame and guilt related to distinct self-discrepancies? A test of Higgins’s (1987) hypotheses. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 75, 256–268.
Tangney, J. P., Wagner, P., & Gramzow, R. (1992). Proneness to
shame, proneness to guilt, and psychopathology. Journal of Abnormal Psychology, 101, 469–478.
Tesser, A. (2001). On the plasticity of self-defense. Current Directions in Psychological Science, 10, 66–69.
Tomkins, S. S. (1963). Affects, imagery, consciousness. New York:
Springer.
Tracy, J. L., & Robins, R. W. (2002, February). Shame, guilt, and
pride: An appraisal-theory perspective. Poster presented at the
3rd Annual meeting of the Society for Personality and Social
Psychology, Savannah, GA.
Tracy, J. L., & Robins, R. W. (2003a). “Death of a (narcissistic) salesman”: An integrative model of fragile self-esteem. Psychological Inquiry, 14, 57–62.
Tracy, J. L., & Robins, R. W. (2003b). Does pride belong in the pantheon? Emotion Researcher: Newsletter for the International
Society for Research on Emotions, 18, 7–8.
Tracy, J. L., & Robins, R. W. (2003c). Does pride have a recognizable expression? In P. Ekman (Ed.), Emotions inside out: 130
years after Darwin’s The expression of emotions in man and animals (Vol. 1000, pp. 313–315). New York: New York Academy of Sciences.
Tracy, J. L., & Robins, R. W. (2004a). Pride and narcissism. Unpublished
raw data. Department of Psychology, University of California, Davis.
Tracy, J. L., & Robins, R. W. (2004b). Show your pride: Evidence for
a discrete emotion expression. Psychological Science, 15,
194–197.
Trivers, R. L. (1971). The evolution of reciprocal altruism. Quarterly
Review of Biology, 46, 35–57.
Twenge, J. M., Baumeister, R. F., Tice, D. M., & Stucke, T. S. (2001).
If you can’t join them, beat them: Effects of social exclusion on

TARGET ARTICLE
velopmental cognitive neuroscience (2nd ed., pp. 21–49)
Oxford, England: Oxford University Press.
Williams, G., III. (1988, November). The selfish heart. Longevity, 24.
Wilson, A. E., & Ross, M. (2001). From chump to champ: People’s
appraisals of their earlier and present selves. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 80, 572–584.
Wink, P. (1991). Two faces of narcissism. Journal of Personality and
Social Psychology, 61, 590–597.
Wright, F., O’Leary, J., & Balkin, J. (1989). Shame, guilt, narcissism,
and depression: Correlates and sex differences. Psychoanalytic
Psychology, 6, 217–230.
Yerkes, R. M., & Yerkes, A. W. (1929). The great apes: A study of
anthropoid life. New Haven, CT: Yale University Press.
Zammuner, V. L. (1996). Felt emotions, and verbally communicated
emotions: The case of pride. European Journal of Social Psychology, 26, 233–245.

Downloaded by [New York University] at 04:28 25 June 2015

aggressive behavior. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 81, 1058–1069.
Watson, P. J., Hickman, S. E., & Morris, R. J. (1996). Self-reported
narcissism and shame: Testing the defensive self-esteem and
continuum hypotheses. Personality and Individual Differences,
21, 253–259.
Weiner, B. (1985). An attributional theory of achievement motivation and emotion. Psychological Review, 92, 548–573.
Weiner, B., Graham, S., & Chandler, C. (1982). Pity, anger, and guilt:
An attributional analysis. Personality and Social Psychology
Bulletin, 8, 226–232.
Weiner, B., & Kukla, A. (1970). An attributional analysis of achievement motivation. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology,
15, 1–20.
Wellman, H. M., & Lagattuta, K. H. (2000). Developing understandings of mind. In S. Baron-Cohen, H. Tager-Flusberg, & D. Cohen (Eds.), Understanding other minds: Perspectives from de-

125

