PERSONALITY PROCESSES AND INDIVIDUAL DIFFERENCES

This document is copyrighted by the American Psychological Association or one of its allied publishers.
This article is intended solely for the personal use of the individual user and is not to be disseminated broadly.

The Psychological Structure of Pride: A Tale of Two Facets
Jessica L. Tracy

Richard W. Robins

University of British Columbia

University of California, Davis

To provide support for the theoretical distinction between 2 facets of pride, authentic and hubristic (J. L.
Tracy & R. W. Robins, 2004a), the authors conducted 7 studies. Studies 1– 4 demonstrate that the 2 facets
(a) emerge in analyses of the semantic meaning of pride-related words, the dispositional tendency to
experience pride, and reports of actual pride experiences; (b) have divergent personality correlates and
distinct antecedent causal attributions; and (c) do not simply reflect positively and negatively valenced,
high- and low-activation, or state versus trait forms of pride. In Studies 5–7, the authors develop and
demonstrate the reliability and validity of brief, 7-item scales that can be used to assess the facets of pride
in future research.
Keywords: pride, authentic pride, hubristic pride, self-conscious emotions

self-esteem in turn influences a wide range of intrapsychic and
interpersonal processes.
Despite its centrality to social behavior, pride has received little
attention in the social–personality literature, even relative to other
self-conscious emotions such as shame and guilt. As a selfconscious emotion, pride traditionally has been viewed as belonging to a secondary class of emotions, separate from the so-called
basic emotions that are thought to be biologically based and
universal. However, recent research showing that pride has a
distinct, cross-culturally recognized nonverbal expression that is
accurately identified by children and adults (Tracy & Robins,
2004b, 2006; Tracy, Robins, & Lagattuta, 2005) suggests that
pride might meet the requisite criteria to be considered a basic
emotion. In fact, pride may serve important adaptive functions.
The expression of pride may communicate an individual’s success
(which elicits the emotion) to others, thereby enhancing the individual’s social status; and the subjective experience of pride might
reinforce the behaviors that generate proud feelings, boost selfesteem, and communicate to the individual that she or he merits
increased status. Thus, following a socially valued success, pride
might function to maintain and promote an individual’s social
status and group acceptance (Leary, Tambor, Terdal, & Downs,
1995), thereby helping to prevent group rejection. This evidence
for the importance of pride in social life raises questions about
what, exactly, pride is. How can we characterize its psychological
structure?

One must not confuse pride and self-love, two passions very different in their nature and in their effects. Self-love is a natural
sentiment which prompts every animal to watch over its own conservation. . . Pride is only a relative, artificial sentiment born in society,
a sentiment which prompts each individual to attach more importance
to himself than to anyone else. . .
—Rousseau (1754/1984, p. 167)

Pride is an important emotion that plays a critical role in many
domains of psychological functioning. In particular, feelings of
pride reinforce prosocial behaviors such as altruism and adaptive
behaviors such as achievement (Hart & Matsuba, in press; Weiner,
1985). The loss of pride is part of what provokes aggression and
other antisocial behaviors in response to ego threats (Bushman &
Baumeister, 1998). The regulation of pride is intrinsically linked to
self-esteem regulation and maintenance; many acts of selfenhancement are likely attempts to increase one’s feelings of pride.
In fact, pride is the primary emotion (along with shame) that gives
self-esteem its affective kick (J. D. Brown & Marshall, 2001), and

Editor’s Note. Mark R. Leary served as the action editor for this article.—CSC

Jessica L. Tracy, Department of Psychology, University of British Columbia, Vancouver, British Columbia, Canada; Richard W. Robins, Department of Psychology, University of California, Davis.
This research was supported by National Institute of Aging Grant
AG022057, Social Sciences and Humanities Research Council Grant 4102006-1593, and a predoctoral fellowship from Nation Institute of Mental
Health Grant T32 MH2006. We thank June Tangney for helpful comments
on a draft of this article.
Correspondence concerning this article should be addressed to Jessica L.
Tracy, Department of Psychology, University of British Columbia, 2136
West Mall Vancouver, British Columbia, V6T 1Z4 Canada. E-mail:
jltracy@psych.ubc.ca

WHAT IS PRIDE?
Several researchers have argued that pride is too broad a concept
to be considered a single, unified construct and is better viewed as
two or more distinct emotions (Ekman, 2003; M. Lewis, 2000).
Consistent with this perspective, pride has been empirically and
theoretically linked to highly divergent outcomes. On the one
hand, pride in one’s successes might promote positive behaviors in

Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 2007, Vol. 92, No. 3, 506 –525
Copyright 2007 by the American Psychological Association 0022-3514/07/$12.00
DOI: 10.1037/0022-3514.92.3.506

506

This document is copyrighted by the American Psychological Association or one of its allied publishers.
This article is intended solely for the personal use of the individual user and is not to be disseminated broadly.

STRUCTURE OF PRIDE

the achievement domain (Herrald & Tomaka, 2002) and contribute
to the development of a genuine and deep-rooted sense of selfesteem. On the other hand, the hubristic pride theoretically associated with narcissism (M. Lewis, 2000), which has been labeled
the deadliest of the Seven Deadly Sins (Dante, 1308 –1321/1937),
might contribute to aggression and hostility, interpersonal problems, relationship conflict, and a host of maladaptive behaviors
(Bushman & Baumeister, 1998; Campbell, 1999; Kernberg, 1975;
Kohut, 1976; Morf & Rhodewalt, 2001; Paulhus, Robins, Trzesniewski, & Tracy, 2004). How can the same emotion serve such
varied and, in many ways, antagonistic roles?
This paradox can be resolved if we tease apart the prosocial,
achievement-oriented form of the emotion from the selfaggrandizing, hubristic form and postulate two distinct facets of
pride (M. Lewis, 2000). A large body of research indicates that
shame and guilt are distinct, negative self-conscious emotions with
divergent elicitors and outcomes (see Tangney & Dearing, 2002,
for a review), and it might make sense to conceptualize pride in a
similar manner (M. Lewis, 2000; Tangney, Wagner, & Gramzow,
1989). Specifically, the pride that results from a specific achievement or prosocial behavior might be distinct from pride in one’s
global self. This distinction parallels the conceptualization of guilt
as derived from a focus on negative aspects of one’s behavior—the
thing that was done or not done—and shame as derived from a
focus on negative aspects of one’s self—the self who did or did not
do it (H. B. Lewis, 1971; M. Lewis, 2000; Tangney & Dearing,
2002). In numerous studies, Tangney and her colleagues (see
Tangney & Dearing, 2002, for a review) have demonstrated that
this distinction characterizes the key difference between shame
and guilt and might be the source of the wide range of divergent
outcomes associated with the two emotions (e.g., guilt and shame
have divergent effects on variables ranging from self-esteem and
optimism to depression, anxiety, and recidivism).
Building on these ideas and findings, we recently developed a
theoretical model of self-conscious emotions in which we hypothesized the existence of two distinct variants of pride, elicited by
distinct cognitive processes (Tracy & Robins, 2004a). According
to our model, self-conscious emotions (pride, shame, guilt, and
embarrassment) are elicited when individuals direct attentional
focus to the self, activating self-representations, and appraise an
emotion-eliciting event as relevant to those representations. In the
case of pride, the event also must be congruent with positive
self-representations. Individuals then must make a series of causal
attributions. Psychologists have long noted that pride occurs in
response to internal attributions—that is, when the self is credited
as the cause of the event (Ellsworth & Smith, 1988; M. Lewis,
2000; Roseman, 1991; C. A. Smith & Lazarus, 1993; Weiner,
1985). However, building on previous theoretical work, we have
argued that two facets of pride can be distinguished by subsequent
attributions. Specifically, authentic, or beta, pride (I’m proud of
what I did) might result from attributions to internal, unstable,
controllable causes (I won because I practiced), whereas pride in
the global self (I’m proud of who I am), referred to as hubristic, or
alpha, pride (M. Lewis, 2000; Tangney et al., 1989), might result
from attributions to internal, stable, uncontrollable causes (I won
because I’m always great).
We have labeled the first facet authentic to emphasize that it is
typically based on specific accomplishments and is likely accompanied by genuine feelings of self-worth. This label also connotes

507

the full range of academic, social, moral, and interpersonal accomplishments that might be important elicitors.1 However, we do not
wish to imply that hubristic pride is not an authentic emotional
experience. Rather, from a theoretical perspective at least, the
elicitors of hubristic pride might be more loosely tied to actual
accomplishments and might involve a self-evaluative process that
reflects a less authentic sense of self (e.g., distorted and selfaggrandized self-views). Of note, our theoretical model specifies
that there are two facets of pride, but it does not indicate whether
these two facets constitute distinct emotions in the way that shame
and guilt are generally conceptualized. We hope that the present
findings provide insights into this issue, and we return to it in the
General Discussion.
In addition to explicating the nature of a complex emotion, the
distinction between the two facets of pride might help resolve
controversial questions about the ways in which individuals regulate self-esteem. Researchers have noted similarities and differences between high self-esteem and narcissism, two personality
constructs that involve high levels of pride but that are associated
with divergent cognitive and behavioral repertoires (e.g., Bushman
& Baumeister, 1998; Paulhus, Robins, Trzesniewski, & Tracy,
2004; Twenge & Campbell, 2003). One way to conceptualize the
difference between the two personality dimensions is to postulate
that each is driven by a different affective core—a different facet
of pride. Specifically, authentic pride might accompany and fuel
high self-esteem, whereas hubristic pride might be the basis of
narcissists’ subjective feeling state (M. Lewis, 2000; Tracy &
Robins, 2003).2 In fact, hubristic pride might be part of a dynamic
regulatory pattern through which narcissists suppress feelings of
shame, in part, by expressing and experiencing exaggerated feelings of (hubristic) pride (Tracy & Robins, 2003). According to this
view, narcissists have highly dissociated positive and negative
self-representations, such that the implicit self is more negative
and the explicit self more positive and idealized. This dissociation
seems likely to be associated with internal, stable, uncontrollable
attributions for success at the explicit self-level (I am a perfect
person, I’m always perfect), which, according to our model, would
elicit hubristic pride.

THE PRESENT RESEARCH
In seven correlational and experimental studies, we test hypotheses derived from our theoretical model of the structure of pride
and its associated processes (Tracy & Robins, 2004a) and develop
scales for assessing the two facets of pride. In Study 1, we examine
lay conceptions about the similarity among pride-related words
and whether these words cluster into two distinct semantic-based
groupings. If pride is constituted of two distinct facets, then lay
conceptions should include two distinct semantic clusters, with
content mapping onto the theoretical distinction between authentic
and hubristic pride.
1
In a previous article, we labeled authentic pride with the somewhat
more narrow descriptor, “achievement-oriented” (Tracy & Robins, 2004a).
2
Following this reasoning, authentic pride should be more closely
linked to genuine, or “authentic,” self-esteem, whereas hubristic pride
should be more closely linked to “fragile” self-esteem (Kernis, 2003; Tracy
& Robins, 2003).

TRACY AND ROBINS

This document is copyrighted by the American Psychological Association or one of its allied publishers.
This article is intended solely for the personal use of the individual user and is not to be disseminated broadly.

508

In Studies 2 and 3, we further test whether there are two facets
of pride by asking participants to rate the extent to which they
experience each of a comprehensive list of pride-related words,
both chronically over time (Study 2) and in response to a single
pride-eliciting event (Study 3). In Studies 2 and 3, we also examine
personality correlates of the pride facets by testing whether each
facet is correlated in a theoretically meaningful way with selfesteem, narcissism, shame-proneness, and the Big Five factors of
personality. On the basis of previous research and theory, we
expected authentic pride to be positively related to self-esteem and
hubristic pride to be positively related to narcissism and shame.
Although the lack of extant research prevents us from making any
specific predictions about the Big Five, it seems reasonable to
expect authentic pride to show a more socially adaptive personality
profile than hubristic pride (i.e., to be positively associated with
those traits previously found to be socially desirable—
extraversion, agreeableness, conscientiousness, and emotional stability; John & Srivastava, 1999; Ozer & Benet-Martinez, 2006).
Furthermore, to the extent that it is a prosocial, achievementmotivated emotion, authentic pride should be particularly strongly
related to agreeableness and conscientiousness, the two personality
traits that have been theoretically and empirically linked to
achievement and a prosocial orientation (Digman, 1997; Graziano
& Tobin, 2002; Roberts, Chernyshenko, Oleksandr, Stark, & Goldberg, 2005). In Studies 2 and 3, we also test several alternative
interpretations of the facets, including the possibility that they
might be better characterized as positive versus negative valence
factors, high- versus low-activation factors, or state versus trait
factors.
In Studies 3 and 4, we test a specific prediction from our
theoretical model (Tracy & Robins, 2004a), namely that the two
facets of pride are elicited by distinct causal attributions, such that
authentic pride is typically elicited by internal, unstable, controllable attributions for a positive event, whereas hubristic pride is
typically elicited by internal, stable, uncontrollable attributions for
the same positive event.3 Specifically, in Study 3, we examine
correlations between participants’ pride feelings during a pride
event and their attributions for that event, content coded from
open-ended narrative descriptions; and, in Study 4, we manipulate
participants’ attributions for a hypothetical pride-eliciting event
and assesses their expected emotional responses.
Finally, in Studies 5–7, we develop brief and reliable scales for
assessing the two facets of pride. These studies refine the set of
items that best represent each facet by using data collected on close
to 2,000 participants from both trait and state assessments of pride.
In Study 7, we provide preliminary support for the validity of these
scales by examining their correlations with theoretically relevant
variables. In addition, in Study 7, we further address the question
of whether the two facets are associated with distinct causal
attributions.
Despite strong theoretical reasons to distinguish between the
two facets of pride, there have been no systematic studies of the
structure of pride; this research marks the first attempt to empirically distinguish between authentic and hubristic pride.

Study 1
In this study, we examine the structure of pride in terms of lay
conceptions about its semantic domain; specifically, whether peo-

ple conceptualize pride as having two distinct facets and, if so,
whether the content of these facets maps onto the theoretical
distinction between authentic and hubristic pride. To examine
people’s ideas of pride, we assessed participants’ ratings of the
semantic similarity among pride-related words. If there are two
distinct facets of pride constructs, participants’ ratings of the
similarity among pride-related words should reveal two clusters of
words, and these clusters should correspond in meaning to the
theoretical facets.

Method
Participants
Undergraduate students enrolled in psychology courses (N ⫽
99; 79% female, 21% male) completed a questionnaire in exchange for course credit.

Measures
Participants were shown 190 pairs of 20 pride-related words
(each word paired one time with each other word) and were
instructed to “rate the following pairs of words or phrases according to how similar in meaning you think they are to each other” on
a scale ranging from 1 (not at all similar) to 5 (extremely similar).
The 20 pride-related words were taken from a previous study
that used an open-ended response method to assess recognition of
the pride nonverbal expression (Tracy & Robins, 2004b, Study 2).
In that study, participants viewed photographs of individuals posing expressions of pride and were asked, “Which emotion is being
expressed in this photo?” To identify the most prototypical priderelated responses, eight expert coders rated the extent to which
each response was prototypical of pride on a 5-point scale (␣
reliability ⫽ .92) ranging from 1 (not at all prototypical) to 5
(extremely prototypical). These coders were advanced undergraduate research assistants, trained to make prototypicality ratings by
Jessica L. Tracy. To exclude irrelevant responses and to reduce the
number of similarity ratings that participants needed to make, we
included in the present study only those responses that had a mean
prototypicality rating of 4 or greater. From this set, we removed
two responses that pilot testing suggested would be difficult to rate
(exulted and yes, I’m the greatest), leaving 20 pride-related words
for inclusion in the present study.

Results and Discussion
We analyzed participants’ similarity ratings by using two clustering procedures. First, we used the pathfinder algorithm
3

The attributional dimension of stability concerns the extent to which
the causes of events have permanence beyond the specific event caused.
Controllability is a related dimension, and represents the extent to which
the causes of events can be changed. Controllable causes tend to be
unstable, and some have argued that the controllability dimension can be
accounted for by the dimensions of stability and globality (Peterson, 1991).
However, others have argued that controllability contributes additional
variance to emotion outcomes beyond these other dimensions (Weiner,
1991). Both dimensions are typically studied in terms of two specific
causes—ability and effort—in which ability is viewed as a stable, uncontrollable cause, and effort as an unstable, controllable cause (Weiner,
1985).

This document is copyrighted by the American Psychological Association or one of its allied publishers.
This article is intended solely for the personal use of the individual user and is not to be disseminated broadly.

STRUCTURE OF PRIDE

(Schvaneveldt, 1990). This algorithm computes the average similarity between each construct in a network by combining participants’ ratings of similarity. The output of a pathfinder analysis is
a network representation of the relations among constructs, with
visible links indicating the strength of the association between any
two constructs (i.e., shorter lengths indicate a closer association).
Second, we analyzed the similarity ratings by using the more
traditional method of hierarchical cluster analysis. The use of two
clustering procedures allows us to be more confident in results that
converge across methods. Furthermore, each procedure has unique
advantages. The pathfinder program generates a fine-grained visual map of the direct and indirect connections among constructs,
whereas the agglomeration coefficients that emerge from cluster
analysis provide greater guidance about the number of clusters and
subclusters that exist within a given content domain. Thus, the use
of the two methods together might be the best approach for
identifying the number of distinct, internally coherent conceptual
clusters that exist in the pride domain and for reaching an understanding of the content of these clusters.
The visual map generated by the pathfinder analysis is presented
in Figure 1A. Given that the map is a descriptive portrait of the
interrelations among terms, we cannot use it to formally test
whether there are two distinct facets of pride, but we can examine
whether its content is consistent with this perspective. Indeed, one
plausible interpretation of the map is that there exist two distinct
clusters of words. As can be seen from Figure 1, the two most
apparent clusters are separated vertically and are linked to each
other through the single word proud, which seems to fit in both
clusters. Within each cluster, most words are linked indirectly
through several other words, but the links are short enough to
indicate that the words in each cluster are closely interrelated.
We next took the mean of participants’ similarity ratings for
each word pair and subjected these mean ratings to hierarchical
cluster analysis by using Ward’s linkage method. The number of
clusters was determined by examination of agglomeration coefficients at each stage of clustering. A large change in coefficient size
(13.32 to 32.20) came at the break between one and two clusters
(the final four coefficients were 32.20, 13.32, 10.06, and 7.50), so
we adopted a two-cluster solution (see Figure 1B). Thus, both
clustering methods suggested that pride-related words can be organized into two conceptual clusters.
To determine whether the two clusters that emerged from these
analyses correspond to the theoretical facets of authentic and
hubristic pride, we examined the content of words in each cluster
in the pathfinder output and in the dendrogram—the visual output
of hierarchical links among words in the cluster analysis. As can be
seen from both panels of Figure 1, the words in the first cluster
seem to fall within the domain of authentic pride. These words
describe feelings about a controllable, typically effort-driven
achievement, such as accomplished, triumphant, and confident.
Almost none of these words convey the stable, grandiose feelings
associated with hubristic pride. In contrast, the second cluster in
both panels includes words such as arrogant, cocky, and conceited,
which connote feelings associated with narcissistic selfaggrandizement.
In summary, Study 1 supports the claim that pride has two
distinct facets, one of which is conceptually linked to achievement
and other connotations of authentic pride (e.g., genuine selfesteem) and the other to general feelings of hubris and other

509

components of narcissism. However, these findings are based on
individuals’ abstract conceptualizations of pride-related words,
and we do not know whether the feelings uniquely associated with
the words in each cluster tend to co-occur when people report on
actual pride experiences. In fact, it is possible that there exist
consensual ideas, or cultural scripts, about the conceptual structure
of pride that are not rooted in actual emotional experience
(Haslam, Bain, & Neal, 2004). We address this issue first in Study
2 by assessing participants’ tendencies to experience a range of
pride-related feelings and again in Study 3 by assessing participants’ reports of their actual emotional feelings during a prideeliciting event. In both studies, we examine whether pride-related
emotional experiences cohere in the predicted two facets.

Study 2
In Study 2, we examine whether the two pride facets replicate in
participants’ ratings of their tendency to experience a large set of
pride-related feeling states. We further test the theoretical conception that hubristic pride is a grandiose form of pride relevant to
narcissism, whereas authentic pride is a prosocial form of the
emotion, more relevant to genuine self-esteem (M. Lewis, 2000;
Tracy & Robins, 2004a). From this perspective, authentic pride
should be linked to genuine high self-esteem, whereas hubristic
pride should be linked to narcissism and shame. In addition, we
attempt to further uncover the personality profile of individuals
who tend to experience one facet of pride versus the other by
examining correlations between the facets and the Big Five factors
of personality. If authentic pride is the more prosocial facet, then
it should show stronger positive correlations with agreeableness
and conscientiousness, the two personality traits most closely
related to prosocial behaviors and achievement (Digman, 1997;
Graziano & Tobin, 2002; Roberts et al., 2005).
We also test three alternative hypotheses for the finding that
people conceptualize pride in terms of two facets. One possibility
is that the distinction is accounted for by a distinction in evaluative
valence. Like many emotions, pride might incorporate both positive (i.e., adaptive) and negative (i.e., maladaptive) elements such
that the positive side of the emotion includes all the concepts and
feelings associated with authentic pride, whereas the negative side
includes concepts and feelings associated with hubristic pride.
Another related possibility is that the distinction is due to differences in activation level among pride-related concepts. According to
Feldman-Barrett and Russell (1998), the bipolar dimensions of activation and evaluative valence underlie the lexicon of all mood and
affect terms (Feldman-Barrett & Russell, 1998). Thus, it is possible
that one of the facets (e.g., authentic pride) includes all high-activation
pride-related words, and the other (e.g., hubristic pride) includes all
low-activation pride-related words. In fact, given that authentic pride
is thought to occur in response to a specific achievement, it might
frequently co-occur with a very high-activation emotion, excitement.
Thus, it is possible that the distinction between the two facets can be
explained as a distinction between a low-activation version of the
emotion and a high-activation version that is, perhaps, a blend of pride
and excitement.
It is also possible that the distinction is a temporal one; hubristic
pride might be pride when it takes the form of a stable, chronic
disposition, whereas authentic pride is the state-like momentary
response form of the emotion. In other words, people who tend to

This document is copyrighted by the American Psychological Association or one of its allied publishers.
This article is intended solely for the personal use of the individual user and is not to be disseminated broadly.

510
TRACY AND ROBINS

Figure 1. A: Visual map of links among pride-related constructs produced by pathfinder analysis. B:
Dendrogram of hierarchical structure of pride-related constructs, produced by cluster analysis.

STRUCTURE OF PRIDE

This document is copyrighted by the American Psychological Association or one of its allied publishers.
This article is intended solely for the personal use of the individual user and is not to be disseminated broadly.

experience the state of authentic pride frequently, or repeatedly
over time, might be characterized by the trait of hubristic pride.
Again, this conceptualization fits with findings on other emotions;
for example, the state and trait forms of fear have divergent
correlates. The state form is associated with quick action and
escape behaviors (LeDoux, 1996), whereas the trait form—
chronic anxiety—is associated with elaborate cognitive rumination
(i.e., focusing on the emotion and elicitor rather than escaping it)
and worry (Nolen-Hoeksema, 2000), behaviors that do not promote quick action or escape. In the present research, after seeking
evidence for the two facets, we test whether such facets can be
accounted for by these three alternative explanations.

Method
Participants
Undergraduate students enrolled in psychology courses (N ⫽
110; 90% female, 10% male) completed a questionnaire in exchange for course credit.

Measures
Ratings of proneness to pride-related feelings. Participants
rated the extent to which they “generally feel this way” for 77
pride-related words on a scale ranging from 1 (not at all) to 5
(extremely). Pride-related words were derived from two sources.
First, as in Study 1, words were taken from responses to photos of
the pride nonverbal expression in a prior study (Tracy & Robins,
2004b, Study 2). To include a more comprehensive set of priderelated words, we used the 45 responses with mean pride prototypicality ratings greater than 3 (the midpoint of the scale).
Second, to ensure that we captured the full spectrum of the pride
experience and not only aspects relevant to the pride nonverbal
expression, we obtained a second set of words by instructing a new
sample of undergraduate psychology students (N ⫽ 205; 79%
female, 21% male) to do the following:
Think about the emotion of PRIDE and how you feel when this
emotion occurs. We would like you to generate a list of words that
characterize what you think, feel, and do when you’re feeling pride.
Keep in mind the thoughts that go through your head, the behaviors
you might show, and the way you feel emotionally and physically.
Now write as many words as you can think of that characterize pride.

The number of responses listed by each participant ranged from 6
to 24, producing a total of 795 different words or phrases. Of these
responses, 65 were listed by at least 2% (n ⫽ 4) of the sample.
Combining these 65 words with the 45 words derived from pride
photos and removing all duplicates produced the final set of 77
pride-related words.4
Valence and activation. Participants rated the extent to which
they “generally feel this way” for each of the words on FeldmanBarrett and Russell’s (1998) valence (e.g., happy, content, miserable, displeased) and activation (e.g., aroused, alert, quiet, still)
mood measures on a scale ranging from 1 (not at all) to 5
(extremely; ␣ reliability ⫽ .77 for valence and .60 for activation).
State and trait ratings. Given that it is impossible to assess
“stateness” or “traitedness” at the individual-difference level (it
makes no sense to ask participants to rate the extent to which they
tend to feel “state-like” or “trait-like”), we used a different method

511

to test whether the factors are simply state versus trait pride. We
assessed stateness and traitedness at the word level and then
conducted analyses across the pride-related words rather than
across people. Eleven doctoral students in social–personality psychology rated the extent to which each of the 77 pride-related
words is “a stable trait” (i.e., what a person is like in general) and
a “temporary state” (i.e., transient thoughts and feelings; what a
person is like at a particular moment) on a scale ranging from 1
(not at all) to 7 (extremely). The alpha reliability was .82 for the
state ratings and .92 for the trait ratings. The state and trait ratings
correlated (⫺.70, p ⬍ .05) across the 77 words.
Personality measures. Several weeks prior to participating in
the study, participants completed the 10-item Rosenberg SelfEsteem Scale (RSE; Rosenberg, 1965; ␣ ⫽ .86); the 40-item
Narcissistic Personality Inventory (NPI; Raskin & Terry, 1988;
␣⫽ .83); the 44-item Big Five Inventory (BFI; John & Srivastava,
1999), which assesses the Big Five factors of Extraversion (␣ ⫽
.87), Agreeableness (␣ ⫽ .74), Conscientiousness (␣ ⫽ .82),
Neuroticism (␣ ⫽ .82), and Openness to Experience (␣ ⫽ .74); and
the 16-item Shame-Proneness subscale from the Test of SelfConscious Affect (TOSCA-3; Tangney & Dearing, 2002; ␣ ⫽
.80). We also assessed guilt-proneness (␣ ⫽ .81) with the
TOSCA-3 in order to compute a scale of guilt-free shame by
saving the standardized residuals from a regression equation predicting shame from guilt.

Results and Discussion
To test whether there are two distinct dimensions underlying the
tendency to experience pride, we conducted a factor analysis with
oblimax rotation on participants’ ratings of the pride-related feeling states.5 Although the ratio of participants to variables was
relatively small (110:77), the ratio of variables to factors was very
high (77:2), making a sample size of 110 more than adequate
(Goldberg & Velicer, 2004; Lee & Ashton, 2007; MacCallum,
Widaman, Zhang, & Hong, 1999). Consistent with our hypothesis,
a scree test indicated two factors; eigenvalues for the first six
unrotated factors were 23.6, 5.8, 3.2, 2.8, 2.4, and 2.0, respectively,
and the first two factors accounted for 38.7% of variance. Although the two-factor solution leaves a considerable amount of
variance unexplained, this level of variance explained is typical of
factors based on single-item ratings, which generally have low
reliability (and therefore relatively little reliable variance to explain) and for factor analyses conducted on a large number of
items that are highly heterogeneous. The two factors correlated
(.36), suggesting that they are somewhat related.
To test whether the data might be better characterized by a
one-factor solution, we used confirmatory factor analysis with the
two pride factors defined by parcels of 6 or 7 items (randomly
selected from among the items defining each factor), as recom4
We also removed two words, the exact meanings of which in this
context might be unfamiliar to many undergraduate students (exulted,
better), and three purely evaluative terms (good, great, and positive). The
full set of 77 words used is available from Jessica L. Tracy upon request.
5
All analyses reported were replicated when varimax rotation was used
instead. Given our theoretical perspective that authentic and hubristic pride are
facets of a broader content domain (“pride”), we expected the factors to
correlate slightly and thus chose to report findings based on oblimax rotation.

This document is copyrighted by the American Psychological Association or one of its allied publishers.
This article is intended solely for the personal use of the individual user and is not to be disseminated broadly.

512

TRACY AND ROBINS

mended by Kishton and Widaman (1994). The use of parcels also
allowed us to test whether the factor structure would replicate with
a higher participant-to-item ratio (110:12). The one-factor solution
did not have an acceptable level of fit, ␹2(54, N ⫽ 105) ⫽ 307.78,
comparative fit index (CFI) ⫽ .92, root-mean-square error of
approximation (RMSEA) ⫽ .213, pclose fit ⫽ .000. In contrast, a
confirmatory factor analysis with the parcels showed that the
two-factor solution had an acceptable fit, ␹2(54, N ⫽ 105) ⫽
97.56, CFI ⫽ .98, RMSEA ⫽ .088, pclose fit ⫽ .018, which was
even better when we allowed the two factors to correlate, ␹2(52,
N ⫽ 105) ⫽ 69.71, CFI ⫽ .99, RMSEA ⫽ .057, pclose fit ⫽ .349.
The difference in fit between the one-factor and the two-factor
solutions was significant, ␹2change(2, N ⫽ 105) ⫽ 238.07, p ⬍ .05.
To examine whether the data might be better characterized by a
three-factor solution, we conducted another factor analysis on
participants’ pride-related word ratings, in which we extracted
three factors and rotated them with oblimax rotation. The content
of the first two factors remained the same but became more
conceptually coherent (i.e., the best loading words on each factor
seemed more relevant to the theoretical content of each factor and
to the words that clustered together in Study 1), and the third factor
was constituted of words that seemed more heterogeneous and less
conceptually linked to pride (e.g., loving, stubborn, relieved). On
the basis of these analyses, we concluded that a two-factor solution
provided the best and most coherent fit to the data.
To better interpret the two factors, we next examined the content
of the words that loaded on each factor. The first factor was clearly
identifiable as Authentic Pride; 8 of the 10 words from the authentic pride cluster in Study 1 had their highest loading on this
factor (the two exceptions were victorious and superior).6 The
second factor was clearly identifiable as Hubristic Pride; all 10 of
the 10 words from the hubristic pride cluster in Study 1 had their
highest loading on this factor. The remainder of items that loaded
highly on the Authentic Pride factor related to achievement (e.g.,
self-assured, like I have ability, successful) or to generalized
positive affect (e.g., smiling, joyful). The remainder of items that
loaded highly on the Hubristic Pride factor related to narcissistic
self-enhancement (e.g., self-centered, snobbish, smug). The fact
that generalized positive affect words loaded on the first factor
suggests that authentic pride might be a more positive emotional
experience than might be hubristic pride and/or that it is more
socially desirable than is hubristic pride.7 Thus, both the confirmatory factor analyses and the pattern of factor loadings suggest
that the data are best characterized by two factors that appear to be
somewhat related and that correspond conceptually to authentic
and hubristic pride.

What Accounts for the Two Factors?
Is it a distinction in evaluative valence? To test whether the
two factors are simply based on distinctions in valence, we partialled valence out of every pride-related word and then conducted
factor analyses on these residualized items. Specifically, we regressed participants’ ratings of valence words onto their ratings of
each pride-related word and saved the standardized residuals for
each word. If the two factors from the original analysis simply
reflect groupings of pleasant and unpleasant words, then partialling
out evaluative variance should prevent those same factors from
emerging.

However, a factor analysis with oblimax rotation of these residual ratings produced two factors with loadings essentially replicating those from the original analysis. To provide a quantitative
index of the correspondence, we computed correlations between
the profile of factor loadings on the original and the valence-free
factors. These correlations (which are computed across the 77
items, not across people) indicate the extent to which items that
have a high (vs. low) loading on the original factor also have a high
(vs. low) loading on the valence-free factor. These correlations
were .88 for Authentic Pride and .97 for Hubristic Pride. We also
examined correlations between factor scores, which are computed
across people. The valence-free Authentic Pride factor correlated
(.75) with the original Authentic Pride factor, and the valence-free
Hubristic Pride factor correlated (.98) with the original Hubristic
Pride factor. Thus, the original factors were generally unchanged
by partialling out evaluative valence, suggesting that the two
dimensions reflect more than just positive and negative sides of the
emotion.
Is it a distinction in activation? To test whether the two facets
of pride are simply based on distinctions in activation, we partialled activation out of every pride-related word and then conducted factor analyses on these residualized items. Specifically, we
regressed participants’ ratings of activation words onto their ratings of each pride-related word and saved the standardized residuals for each word. If the two factors from the original analysis
simply reflect groupings of activated and deactivated words, then
partialling out variance in activation should prevent those same
factors from emerging.
However, a factor analysis with oblique rotation of these residual ratings produced two factors with loadings essentially replicating those from the original analysis. As with valence, we
computed correlations between the profile of factor loadings on the
original and activation-free factors. These correlations were .94 for
Authentic Pride and .99 for Hubristic Pride. We also examined
correlations between factor scores, which are computed across
people. The activation-free Authentic Pride factor correlated (.84)
with the original Authentic Pride factor, and the activation-free
Hubristic Pride factor correlated (.97) with the original Hubristic
Pride factor. Thus, the original factors were generally unchanged
by partialling out activation, suggesting that the two dimensions
reflect more than just activated and deactivated forms of pride.
6

The disparity regarding the word victorious might be due to the
difference between state and trait forms of the word. In Study 2, participants viewed each word specifically as a dispositional tendency, but in
Study 1, in which participants were not given any temporal information
about the words, the likely default perspective would be to view emotion
words as emotions—that is, temporary states. The fact that victorious
returned to the authentic pride factor in Study 3, in which participants rated
words as states, supports this interpretation. In contrast, the word superior
emerged as a hubristic pride item in all analyses in both Studies 2 and 3,
so its location in the authentic cluster in Study 1 is likely an anomaly
related to that study.
7
We also conducted the factor analyses separately on words derived
from photos of the pride expression and words derived from descriptions of
the pride experience. For both sets, the same two factors emerged, with
content replicating the authentic and hubristic pride clusters. We also
conducted these analyses separately in Study 3 and again found the same
pattern; the two factors emerged regardless of which set of words was used.

STRUCTURE OF PRIDE

513

Table 1
Correlations of Authentic and Hubristic Pride With Self-Esteem, Narcissism, Shame-Proneness,
and the Big Five Personality Factors (Studies 2 and 3)
Study 2: Trait pridea

This document is copyrighted by the American Psychological Association or one of its allied publishers.
This article is intended solely for the personal use of the individual user and is not to be disseminated broadly.

Measure
RSE
NPI
Shame-pronenessc
Extraversion
Agreeableness
Conscientiousness
Emotional Stability
Openness

Authentic
*

*

.62 (.56 )
.28* (.10)
⫺.43*
.47*
.35*
.34*
.43*
.18

Study 3: State prideb

Hubristic

Authentic

⫺.30 (⫺.36 )
.14 (.25*)
.29*
.00
⫺.38*
⫺.23*
⫺.14
⫺.08
*

*

*

*

.38 (.33 )
.26* (.16)
⫺.26*
.29*
.36*
.34*
.19
.25*

Hubristic
⫺.28* (⫺.35*)
.13 (.23*)
.26*
⫺.06
⫺.29*
⫺.22
⫺.20
⫺.17

Note. Values in parentheses are partial correlations controlling for narcissism and self-esteem, respectively.
RSE ⫽ Rosenberg Self-Esteem Scale; NPI ⫽ Narcissistic Personality Inventory.
a
N ⫽ 99. b N ⫽ 91. c Shame-proneness scale is “guilt-free” shame (i.e., shame-proneness controlling for
guilt-proneness).
*
p ⬍ .05.

Is it a temporal distinction (state vs. trait)? In contrast to
valence and activation, the state–trait ratings are ratings of the
words themselves and, therefore, do not vary across participants.
Thus, the only way to examine the degree to which each factor is
trait-like versus state-like is to compute correlations across the 77
items. Specifically, we correlated the profile of loadings for the
Authentic Pride and the Hubristic Pride factors with the mean trait
and state ratings for each item. These correlations ranged in
magnitude from .01 to .12 (all ns). Thus, the extent to which a
word is trait-like and state-like is not related to the magnitude of its
loading on either factor. We also conducted t tests comparing the
mean state and trait ratings for words that had their highest loading
on Authentic Pride with mean trait and state ratings for words that
had their highest loading on Hubristic Pride. There were no significant differences between the factors, suggesting that neither
factor should be interpreted as a trait or state factor.

What is the Personality Profile of the Authentic Versus
the Hubristic Pride-Prone Person?
Factor scores on the two pride factors provide a way to assess
individual differences in the extent to which participants generally
experience hubristic or authentic pride. By correlating these factor
scores with theoretically relevant variables, we can further examine whether the two factors fit with the theoretical distinction
between authentic and hubristic pride. The goal of these correlational analyses was to provide a greater conceptual understanding
of the pride factors rather than to determine whether the factors can
be entirely accounted for by variance in constructs such as selfesteem, narcissism, and shame—which, of course, was the goal of
the prior analyses examining valence, activation, and stateness
versus traitedness. Following Tangney and her colleagues (Tangney & Dearing, 2002), we conducted these analyses after removing
the variance shared between the two factors; specifically, we
computed residual scores via multiple regression, in which we
removed variance associated with hubristic pride from the Authentic Pride factor and variance associated with authentic pride from
the Hubristic Pride factor. This data analytic procedure fits with
our aim to examine the distinct correlates of the two factors, just

as Tangney and her colleagues aimed to understand the distinct
correlates of guilt and shame by controlling for their shared variance.8
Results showed that Authentic Pride was positively correlated
with self-esteem and narcissism. Hubristic Pride was also positively correlated with narcissism, but, in contrast to Authentic
Pride, it was negatively correlated with self-esteem (see Table 1).
In addition, when we partialled out shared variance between narcissism and self-esteem (r ⫽ .30, p ⬍ .05) from of these correlations, the relationship between authentic pride and narcissism was
substantially reduced (r ⫽ .10, ns). This finding suggests that the
relationship between authentic pride and narcissism was likely the
result of shared variance in self-positivity (which was removed
when we controlled for self-esteem). In contrast, Hubristic Pride
was uniquely related to narcissistic self-aggrandizement, the variable that remains when self-esteem is statistically removed from
narcissism. This variable—the NPI controlling for the RSE—
might be more similar to traditional conceptualizations of narcissism (i.e., Kernberg, 1975; Kohut, 1976) than are raw scores on the
NPI (Paulhus et al., 2004).
We also found that Authentic Pride was negatively correlated
with shame-proneness, suggesting that individuals who tend to
experience authentic pride tend not to feel shame. In contrast,
Hubristic Pride was positively correlated with shame-proneness
(r ⫽ .29, p ⬍ .05), which is consistent with the idea that hubristic
pride might, in part, be a defensive response to underlying feelings
of shame.
Finally, we examined correlations between the pride factors and
the Big Five factors of personality. Although we had no formal
predictions, we expected that Authentic Pride would be associated
with a more adaptive personality profile than would Hubristic
Pride and, in particular, would show stronger positive correlations
with the most prosocial factor, Agreeableness, and with the factor
that most closely represents achievement motivation, Conscientiousness. Results supported these expectations; Authentic Pride
8

All significant correlations reported in Studies 2 and 3 remained significant when varimax rotation was used instead.

TRACY AND ROBINS

This document is copyrighted by the American Psychological Association or one of its allied publishers.
This article is intended solely for the personal use of the individual user and is not to be disseminated broadly.

514

was positively correlated with all of the adaptive personality
factors, except for Openness (for which the correlation was in the
positive direction but was not significant). In contrast, Hubristic
Pride was significantly correlated with only Agreeableness and
Conscientiousness, and the negative relations with these factors is
consistent with the idea that hubristic pride is the less prosocial,
achievement-oriented facet (Agreeableness and Conscientiousness
have been interpreted by Digman, 1997, as reflecting a superordinate factor of Socialization). It is important to note that for each of
the Big Five except Openness, the correlations with Authentic
Pride and Hubristic Pride differed significantly ( p ⬍ .05). Thus,
individuals who tend to experience authentic pride have a markedly divergent personality profile from those who tend to experience hubristic pride.8

Summary
Study 2 provides further evidence for the existence of two
distinct facets of pride and for the theoretical interpretation that
these facets represent authentic and hubristic pride. This study also
allows us to rule out several alternative interpretations of the two
facets, namely that they simply reflect differences in valence,
activation, or the extent to which each is a state versus a trait form
of the emotion.9
One limitation of Study 2, however, is that it focuses on emotional dispositions, and previous research suggests that the structure of affect might differ for temporary mood ratings (Diener &
Emmons, 1984). Thus, in Study 3, we assessed participants’ reports of pride-related feelings in the context of a specific emotional
experience. Study 3 also begins to address the cognitive process
that underlies pride and whether the two facets might be associated
with distinct cognitive attributions.

Study 3
In Study 3, we had two primary aims: (a) to replicate the findings
of Studies 1 and 2 for descriptions of a specific pride experience and
(b) to test whether the two facets of pride are distinguished by the
causal attributions participants make for pride-eliciting events. To
address these aims, we asked participants to write about an actual
pride experience and to rate the extent to which each of a set of
pride-related words characterized their feelings during the experience.
As in Study 2, we used confirmatory factor analysis to determine
whether the structure of pride feelings is characterized by two distinct
dimensions that fit with the theoretical distinction between authentic
and hubristic pride. We also again tested whether differences in
valence and the extent to which words are state-like versus trait-like
can account for the emergence of the two pride factors, this time by
using a different measure of valence. In addition, we attempted to
replicate the correlations found in Study 2 among the tendency to
experience each of the pride factors and self-esteem, narcissism,
shame-proneness, and the Big Five personality dimensions to validate
the characterological profiles of the authentic and the hubristic prideprone person that emerged in Study 2.
Study 3 also provides the first empirical test of a central hypothesis from our theoretical model: Attributing positive events to
internal, unstable, controllable causes leads to authentic pride,
whereas attributing the same events to internal, stable, uncontrollable causes leads to hubristic pride (Tracy & Robins, 2004a). We

tested this hypothesis by assessing causal attributions through
content coding of participants’ narrative descriptions of their pride
experience and by assessing the two dimensions of pride from
participants’ self-reported ratings of their feelings during the experience. By assessing attributions and emotions from such different sources, we can minimize shared method variance in any
correlations found.
We also examined the alternative possibility that the two dimensions of pride are elicited not by distinct cognitive appraisals
(or causal attributions) but by distinct kinds of events. Researchers
have long debated whether guilt and shame are elicited by distinct
kinds of events or distinct appraisals of the same events (e.g., Buss,
1980; H. S. Smith, Webster, Parrott, & Eyre, 2002; Tangney,
Miller, Flicker, & Barlow, 1996). Recent research suggests that it
is not the event, but rather how that event is appraised that
determines which emotion occurs (Keltner & Buswell, 1996;
Tangney et al., 1996; Tracy & Robins, in press). On the basis of
this evidence, it seems likely that, to the extent that the two facets
of pride are distinct, they too will be elicited by distinct cognitive
appraisals and not by distinct antecedent events.

Method
Participants
Undergraduate students enrolled in psychology courses (N ⫽
105; 69% female, 31% male) participated in the study in exchange
for course credit.

Measures
Pride event. Participants were instructed to “think about a time
when you felt very proud of yourself. . .describe the events that led
up to your feeling this way in as much detail as you can remember.” This task is a version of the well-established relived emotion
task (Ekman, Levenson, & Friesen, 1983), which has been shown
to manipulate emotional experiences and to produce emotiontypical subjective feelings and physiology (Ekman et al., 1983;
Levenson, 1992). After providing open-ended narrative responses
(ranging in length from one paragraph to one page), participants
rated the extent to which each of the 77 pride-related words used
in Study 2 described their feelings during the event on a scale
ranging from 1 (not at all) to 5 (extremely).
Valence. Participants rated the extent to which two words
describing pure positive evaluation (good and positive) described
their feelings during the event on a scale ranging from 1 (not at all)
to 5 (extremely); alpha reliability for the two items ⫽ .73.
State and trait ratings. We used the state and trait ratings of
the pride-related words derived in Study 2.
Personality measures. Several weeks prior to participating in
the study, participants completed the BFI (␣s ⫽ .84 for Extraver9
We also examined whether the factors could be accounted for by
differences in intensity by correlating intensity ratings for each priderelated word (computed from means ratings across three expert raters,
interrater reliability ⫽ .72) with the factor loadings. The correlations were,
for authentic and hubristic pride respectively, ⫺.06 and .11 (both ns) in
Study 2 and ⫺.07 and .21 (both ns) in Study 3, suggesting that the intensity
of the words was not related to their loading on either factor.

This document is copyrighted by the American Psychological Association or one of its allied publishers.
This article is intended solely for the personal use of the individual user and is not to be disseminated broadly.

STRUCTURE OF PRIDE

sion, .70 for Agreeableness, .79 for Conscientiousness, .76 for
Neuroticism, and .78 for Openness to Experience), the RSE (␣ ⫽
.89), the NPI (␣ ⫽ .82), and the TOSCA-3 Shame-proneness (␣ ⫽
.72) and Guilt-proneness (␣ ⫽ .76) scales.
Content coding of causal attributions from pride descriptions.
Eight expert judges (advanced undergraduate research assistants),
who were blind to participants’ ratings of their feelings and the
goals of the study, were trained to independently code all openended responses on the following dimensions: (a) stability (Is the
cause of the event something stable about the participant, which is
likely to be present again in the future and cause similar events?)
on a scale ranging from 1 (unstable cause, might never be present
again) to 5 (highly stable cause, definitely present again); (b) self
versus behavior (To the extent that the participant thinks the cause
is due to something about himself or herself, does he or she
attribute it more to his or her personality and self or to his or her
actions and behaviors?) on a scale ranging from 1 (completely
attributes to actions, behaviors) to 5 (completely attributes to self,
personality); (c) ability (To what extent does the participant believe that his or her ability was the cause of the event?) on a scale
ranging from 1 (not at all) to 5 (very much); and (d) effort (To what
extent does the participant believe that the amount of effort that he
or she made was the cause of the event?) on a scale ranging from
1 (not at all) to 5 (very much). For each dimension, we computed
the mean rating across judges; interrater alpha reliabilities were .74
(stability), .74 (self vs. behavior), .81 (ability), and .89 (effort).
The self versus behavior item provided a second index of stability
and controllability, given that the self and personality are typically
viewed as stable and uncontrollable, whereas actions and behaviors are unstable and controllable.
Content coding of types of events that elicited pride. The eight
judges were also trained to content code the extent to which each
of the following events was the “type of event that elicited the
emotion”: achievement (involving school, grades, exams, workrelated events/behavior), relational (involving romantic relationships), familial (involving family members), personal (involving
personal goals or morals), and athletic. Each narrative received a
score for each event type on a scale ranging from 1 (not at all this
type of event) to 5 (very much this type of event). There was not
enough variance on the relational item to compute an interrater
reliability alpha (almost all descriptions received a 1 from all eight
coders on this item, suggesting that relationships are not a prototypical elicitor of pride for college students); but for the other
items interrater alpha reliabilities were .87 (achievement), .98
(familial), .80 (personal), and 1.00 (athletic).

515

each rather than by individual items. The one-factor solution did
not have an acceptable level of fit, ␹2(54, N ⫽ 98) ⫽ 443.07,
CFI ⫽ .837, RMSEA ⫽ .273, pclose fit ⫽ .000. In contrast, a
confirmatory factor analysis with the parcels showed that the
two-factor solution had an acceptable fit, ␹2(54, N ⫽ 98) ⫽
104.36, CFI ⫽ .97, RMSEA ⫽ .098, pclose fit ⫽ .005, which was
even better when we allowed the two factors to correlate, ␹2(52, N
⫽ 98) ⫽ 69.54, CFI ⫽ .98, RMSEA ⫽ .094, pclose fit ⫽ .011. The
difference in fit between the one-factor and the two-factor solution
was significant, ␹2(2, N ⫽ 98) ⫽ 346.53, p ⬍ .05.
To examine whether the data might be better characterized by a
three-factor solution, we again conducted a factor analysis on
participants’ ratings of the pride-related words, in which we extracted three factors and rotated them with oblimax rotation. As in
Study 2, the content of the first two factors remained the same but
became more conceptually coherent (i.e., highly loading words
were more relevant to the theoretical content of each factor), and
the third factor included words that seemed less conceptually
linked to pride (e.g., friendly, loving, secure, courageous). Thus, as
in Study 2, the data are best characterized by two factors that
appear to be somewhat related (r ⫽ .30).
Consistent with Study 2, the content of the words that loaded
onto each factor fit with the distinction between authentic and
hubristic pride. Specifically, the first factor was clearly identifiable
as Authentic Pride; 9 of the 10 words from the authentic pride
cluster in Study 1 had their highest loading on this factor. The
second factor was clearly identifiable as Hubristic Pride; all 10 of
the 10 words from the hubristic pride cluster had their highest
loading on this factor. As in Study 2, the remainder of items that
loaded highly on the Authentic Pride factor related to achievement
or to generalized positive affect, and the remainder of items that
loaded highly on the Hubristic Pride factor related to narcissistic
self-enhancement.
To statistically examine the extent to which these factors replicated those found in Study 2, we computed correlations between
the profile of factor loadings obtained in Studies 2 and 3. These
correlations (which were computed across the 77 items, not across
people), indicate the extent which items that have a high (vs. low)
loading on each factor in Study 2 also have a high (vs. low) loading
on each factor in Study 3. Authentic Pride correlated (.70, p ⬍ .05)
across studies, and Hubristic Pride correlated (.69, p ⬍ .05) across
studies. Given that these correlations are based on ratings from
different samples of participants, who reported on pride in different contexts (their chronic dispositional tendencies versus their
response to a particular event), the strength of the correlations
indicates the robustness of the factors.

Results and Discussion
What Accounts for the Two Dimensions?
Are There Two Dimensions of the Pride Experience?
To test whether there are two distinct dimensions underlying the
pride experience, we conducted a factor analysis with oblimax
rotation on participants’ ratings of the pride-related feeling states.
Consistent with our expectations, a scree test indicated two factors;
eigenvalues for the first six unrotated factors were 21.6, 8.8, 3.8,
2.7, 2.4, and 2.2, and the first two factors accounted for 40.1% of
variance. To test whether the data might be better characterized by
a one-factor solution, we again used confirmatory factor analysis
with the two pride factors defined by parcels of six or seven items

Valence. A factor analysis of residual pride-word ratings, with
ratings of the two pure positive evaluation words partialled out,
produced two factors with loadings essentially replicating those
from the original analysis. Correlations between the profile of
factor loadings on the original and valence-free factors were .85
for Authentic Pride and .98 for Hubristic Pride. Correlations between factors scores were .64 for Authentic Pride and .97 for
Hubristic Pride. The comparatively lower correlation for Authentic
Pride might reflect the fact, documented in Study 2, that authentic
pride includes more positively valenced evaluative content than

This document is copyrighted by the American Psychological Association or one of its allied publishers.
This article is intended solely for the personal use of the individual user and is not to be disseminated broadly.

516

TRACY AND ROBINS

does hubristic pride. Statistically removing this content thus has a
relatively greater impact on authentic pride. Overall, though, the
findings support the conclusion that the two facets reflect more
than just positive and negative forms of pride.
State versus trait. Authentic Pride was uncorrelated with the
state ratings (r ⫽ .23, ns) but was negatively correlated with trait
ratings (r ⫽ ⫺.26, p ⬍ .05); Hubristic Pride was negatively correlated
with state ratings (r ⫽ ⫺.27, p ⬍ .05) and positively correlated with
trait ratings (r ⫽ .25, p ⬍ .05). These correlations suggest that
hubristic pride is more trait-like than is authentic pride. However, this
effect did not hold when we classified words on the basis of a
comparison of their loadings on each factor as belonging to one or the
other. T tests showed no significant differences in stateness or traitedness ratings between authentic pride-related words and hubristic
pride-related words. This finding, combined with the fact that there
were no significant correlations between the factor loadings and the
state and trait ratings in Study 2, suggests that the two factors are
unlikely to be entirely due to the state–trait distinction, although this
distinction seems to play some role in contributing to the differences
between the factors.
Personality correlates of authentic and hubristic pride. As in
Study 2, we conducted correlational analyses with residualized factor
scores on the basis of the standardized residuals from multiple regression equations predicting hubristic pride from authentic pride and vice
versa. Replicating the findings of Study 2, Authentic Pride was
positively correlated with self-esteem, whereas Hubristic Pride was
negatively correlated with self-esteem (see Table 1). Also replicating
the findings of Study 2, Authentic Pride was positively related to
narcissism, but this relationship became nonsignificant when shared
variance with self-esteem was removed. The opposite effect occurred
for Hubristic Pride; it became more positively associated with narcissism when self-esteem was partialled out. This replicated suppressor
situation further supports the view that hubristic pride is more strongly
linked to narcissistic self-aggrandizement than is authentic pride.
We also replicated the correlations with shame-proneness, which
was again negatively correlated with Authentic Pride and positively
correlated with Hubristic Pride. Finally, the correlations with the Big
Five factors found in Study 2 were also generally replicated. The two
facets of pride had significantly different ( p ⬍ .05) correlations with
all five trait dimensions, and, again, Authentic Pride was related to the
more socially desirable personality dimensions.
In summary, individuals with genuine high self-esteem, who
were extraverted, agreeable, conscientious, and open to experience
tended to experience authentic pride in response to a pride-eliciting
event, whereas self-aggrandizing, shame-prone, disagreeable individuals tended to experience hubristic pride in response to such an
event. This pattern generally replicates the findings of Study 2 and
is consistent with theoretical distinctions between the two facets.

Do Stability and Controllability Attributions Distinguish
Between Authentic and Hubristic Pride?
We next examine whether authentic and hubristic pride are associated with distinct cognitive attributions by correlating the two residualized pride factors with participants’ causal attributions for prideeliciting events, which emerged from the content coding of their
narratives. Although the effects were not particularly strong, the
correlations were generally consistent with the predictions that
emerged from our theoretical model (see Table 2). Individuals who

Table 2
Correlations of Authentic and Hubristic Pride Factor Scores
With Attribution Dimensions (Study 3)
Dimension

Authentic

Hubristic

Unstable attributiona
Attribution to self as opposed to behavior
Attribution to effort
Attribution to ability

.21*
.01
.03
.12

⫺.02
.21*
⫺.18*
.26*

Note. N ⫽ 88.
a
Unstable attribution was assessed as attributions to stable causes, reverse
scored.
*
p ⬍ .05.

tended to attribute the pride-eliciting event to causes that were coded
as internal and unstable tended to experience authentic pride in response to the event. In contrast, individuals who tended to attribute the
event to their ability and to “the self” (as opposed to their presumably
more unstable behaviors or actions) tended to experience hubristic
pride. In addition, individuals who attributed the event to their effort
tended not to experience hubristic pride. Thus, the results provide
preliminary support for the prediction that internal, unstable attributions (i.e., to effort) for positive events are related to authentic pride,
whereas internal, stable attributions (i.e., to ability) for positive events
are related to hubristic pride.

Are the Two Facets Associated With Distinct Antecedent
Events?
To determine the types of events that participants believed elicited
their pride, we classified each narrative into the category that was
rated as most descriptive of its eliciting event (i.e., the category that
received the highest mean rating). Of the events, 69% were coded as
primarily about achievement, 18% as primarily athletic, 12% as
primarily about personal factors, and 1% as primarily familial. None
of the events were coded as primarily about relationships. The specific
mean ratings for each category showed a similar, but not identical,
pattern: 3.90 (achievement), 2.56 (personal), 1.76 (athletic), 1.12
(familial), and 1.06 (relational). These findings suggest that when
college students are asked to write about a time when they felt proud,
they tend to think of events related to academics, personal goals and
morals, and athletics and not to their familial, affiliative, or romantic
relationships.10
To test for differences between authentic and hubristic pride in
types of eliciting events, we classified each participant according
to whether they had a higher factor score on the Authentic Pride or
the Hubristic Pride factor—a rough measure of which facet they
10

It is interesting to note that we recently found the opposite pattern for
shame and guilt: Participants in a similar experiment were least likely to
write about shame and guilt occurring in response to academic achievement (in this case, failure; Tracy & Robins, 2006). It is thus possible that
the achievement/work domain is a more prototypical elicitor of positive
self-conscious emotions, whereas the relationship domain is a more prototypical elicitor of negative self-conscious emotions. However, it is also
possible that participants are simply more willing to write about success in
the achievement than in the relationship domain and more willing to write
about failure in the relationship than in the achievement domain.

This document is copyrighted by the American Psychological Association or one of its allied publishers.
This article is intended solely for the personal use of the individual user and is not to be disseminated broadly.

STRUCTURE OF PRIDE

experienced to a greater extent. We then compared mean ratings of
event type between participants who experienced more authentic
pride and those who experienced more hubristic pride. There were
no significant differences, suggesting that both facets were fairly
equally likely to occur in response to each type of event. We also
addressed this issue by classifying each narrative into the eventtype category for which it received the highest rating. We then ran
an analysis of variance (ANOVA) to test whether the four event
types differed on Authentic Pride and Hubristic Pride factor scores.
There were no significant differences for either factor, confirming
the results of the previous analysis. However, converting the
continuous factor scores and event-type ratings into discrete
categories loses much of the relevant data (e.g., participants
who are fairly high on both factors or whose narratives fall into
more than one category), so we also correlated the factor scores
with mean ratings on each event type. These correlations ranged
in magnitude from .02 to .12, and none reached significance.
Thus, the two facets of pride tend to be elicited by the same
kinds of events, and it appears that the way these events are
appraised is a more important predictor of a person’s emotional
reaction.
Overall, Study 3 is consistent with the findings of Studies 1 and
2. Two distinct dimensions of pride emerged from reports of a
single pride experience, and the content of these dimensions fit
with the theoretical distinction between authentic and hubristic
pride. Furthermore, correlations between the dimensions and relevant personality variables (self-esteem, narcissism, shameproneness, and the Big Five factors) also support the theoretical
interpretation. In addition, the two facets showed a divergent
pattern of correlations with causal attributions, such that authentic
pride was associated with internal, unstable, controllable attributions, whereas hubristic pride was associated with internal, stable,
uncontrollable attributions. For both facets of pride, these attributions were made for the same kinds of positive events—there was
no difference in the type of event that elicited each emotion.
One limitation of Study 3, however, is that we cannot rule out
the possibility that the causal direction is reversed. For example,
feeling hubristic pride might lead individuals to attribute their
success to a stable, uncontrollable aspect of the self. In Study 4, we
address this issue by manipulating attributions. We also test
whether controllability, as opposed to stability, might be the attributional dimension that better distinguishes between the two facets
(the specific causes of effort and ability differ on both controllability and stability).

Study 4
In Study 4, we manipulated participants’ causal attributions for
a hypothetical event and assessed the extent to which they expected to feel authentic and hubristic pride in response.

Method
Participants
Undergraduate students enrolled in psychology courses (N ⫽
160; 76% female, 24% male) participated in exchange for course
credit.

517

Procedure and Design
Participants read two vignettes about a hypothetical college
student succeeding on a final exam, a commonly experienced and
emotionally evocative event for most college students. Before
reading the vignettes, participants were instructed as follows:
Below is a set of scenarios describing typical experiences that a
student might have in college. As you read each scenario, think about
how you would feel if you were actually living through this experience. Try to imagine the thoughts and feelings you would have if you
were actually in this situation.

Participants were randomly assigned to read two vignettes that
described events varying in either the stability (stable vs. unstable)
or controllability (controllable vs. uncontrollable) of causes. All
vignettes involved an event that was internally caused. Each vignette was two to three sentences long and in the second-person
singular (i.e., you) form. For example, the internal, controllable
vignette read as follows: You recently had an important exam and
you studied hard for it. You just found out that you did very well
on the exam. In contrast, the internal, uncontrollable vignette read
as follows: You’ve always been naturally talented (i.e., smart). You
recently had an important exam and you didn’t bother studying
much for it, but it still seemed very easy to you. You just found out
that you did very well on the exam. By manipulating controllability
and stability separately, we were able to test which, if either, of the
two attributional dimensions played a larger role in distinguishing
between the two facets of pride.
All of the vignettes had been pretested to verify that they did, in
fact, manipulate the appropriate attributions. On the basis of a
sample of 57 undergraduate students (from the same population as
the present sample) effort ratings for the stability vignettes were
higher in the internal, unstable condition than in the internal, stable
condition, t(56) ⫽ 6.75, p ⬍ .05, whereas ability ratings were
higher in the internal, stable condition than in the internal, unstable
condition, t(56) ⫽ 5.83, p ⬍ .05. For the controllability vignettes,
effort ratings were higher in the internal, controllable condition
than in the internal, uncontrollable condition, t(57) ⫽ 15.22, p ⬍
.05, whereas ability ratings were higher in the internal, uncontrollable condition than the internal, controllable condition, t(57) ⫽
5.28, p ⬍ .05. It is noteworthy that ability might be unstable for
those who believe that they can improve their abilities, and effort
might be stable when conceived of as a personality trait, such as
laziness (Dweck, 1999; Weiner, 1985). Nonetheless, in the present
research we conceptualize effort and ability in their most prototypical form, distinguished by the causal dimensions of stability
and controllability, and the results of this manipulation check
support our conceptualization.
After reading each vignette, participants rated the extent to
which they expected to feel each of a set of pride-related words in
response to the event on a scale ranging from 0 (not at all) to 6
(extremely). The selection of words was based on the results of
Studies 2 and 3; only words that loaded on the same factor across
studies were included. The 48 words that loaded consistently on
the Authentic Pride factor were composited into an Authentic
Pride scale (␣s ⫽ .96 –.98 across the four conditions); the 15 words
that loaded consistently on the Hubristic Pride factor were composited into a Hubristic Pride scale (␣s ⫽ .92–.96 across the four
conditions).

TRACY AND ROBINS

518
Results and Discussion

This document is copyrighted by the American Psychological Association or one of its allied publishers.
This article is intended solely for the personal use of the individual user and is not to be disseminated broadly.

Do Authentic and Hubristic Pride Have Distinct
Attributional Antecedents?
Stability attributions. To test whether stability attributions differentiated between authentic and hubristic pride, we conducted a
two-way ANOVA with emotion (authentic vs. hubristic pride) and
stability (stable vs. unstable) as within-subject variables. We found
the predicted two-way interaction, F(1, 79) ⫽ 28.49, p ⬍ .05.
Internal, unstable attributions led to greater authentic pride (M ⫽
4.30) than did internal, stable attributions (M ⫽ 3.78, d ⫽ .57, p ⬍
.05), but these attributions did not have the same effect on hubristic
pride; means were 2.30 for internal, unstable attributions and 2.36
for internal, stable attributions (d ⫽ ⫺.05, ns).
Controllability attributions. To test whether controllability attributions differentiated between authentic and hubristic pride, we
conducted a two-way ANOVA with emotion (authentic vs. hubristic pride) and controllability (controllable vs. uncontrollable) as
within-subjects variables. We found the predicted two-way interaction, F(1, 79) ⫽ 68.24, p ⬍ .05. Internal, controllable attributions led to greater authentic pride (M ⫽ 4.43) than did internal,
uncontrollable attributions (M ⫽ 3.75, d ⫽ .58, p ⬍ .05); in
contrast, internal, controllable attributions led to less hubristic
pride (M ⫽ 2.13) than did internal, uncontrollable attributions
(M ⫽ 2.44, d ⫽ ⫺.24, p ⬍ .05).
Stability versus controllability. The Emotion ⫻ Controllability interaction (␩2 ⫽ 46%) was significantly larger than the Emotion ⫻ Stability interaction (␩2 ⫽ 26%), as indicated by a threeway interaction with vignette type (stability vs. controllability),
F(1, 158) ⫽ 6.37, p ⬍ .05.

research suggests that findings from appraisal manipulation studies,
which make use of predicted responses to hypothetical events, tend to
converge with findings from studies manipulating actual, on-line
emotional experiences (Robinson & Clore, 2001). Regardless, the
findings reported here should be replicated in future research examining actual emotional experiences.

Study 5
The findings from Studies 1– 4 provide strong evidence that
pride has two distinct facets, which are associated with unique
personality profiles, subjective feeling states, and causal attributions. To facilitate further research on these two facets, an important next step is to develop a psychometrically sound measure of
authentic and hubristic pride.
In Studies 5–7, we collected data on a total of 1,925 participants to
develop reliable and valid scales of authentic and hubristic pride that
can be used to assess both chronic, dispositional pride-prone tendencies and momentary on-line pride experiences evoked in a laboratory
setting. Our strategy was to construct an initial item pool on the basis
of the results of Studies 1–3 and then to refine the resulting scales on
the basis of reliability and factor analyses, with particular attention
paid to replicability across samples and methods (i.e., assessing state
and trait pride). As a first step, Study 5 assessed chronic, dispositional
tendencies to experience pride by using a larger sample of participants
than was used previously and by following procedures aimed at
identifying a set of authentic and hubristic pride-related words that are
conceptually relevant, cohere together empirically, and show a clean
factor structure, with high loadings on the primary factor and low
loadings on the other factor.11

Method
Summary
These results suggest that, although participants were generally
more likely to report authentic than hubristic pride in response to
a success, the attributions they made for the success influenced the
extent to which they expected to experience each facet of pride.
Authentic pride was a more typical response when success was
attributed to internal, unstable, controllable causes (e.g., effort)
than to internal, stable, uncontrollable causes (e.g., ability);
whereas hubristic pride showed the opposite pattern. Combined
with the findings of Study 3, this research provides the first
empirical support for the hypothesis that the stability and controllability of internal attributions for success distinguish between
authentic and hubristic pride. Furthermore, the experimental design of Study 4 allows us to make stronger inferences about the
causal influence of attributions on the two facets of pride.
However, it is important to note that these findings are limited by
the fact that participants anticipated reactions to hypothetical events
rather than reporting on actual emotional experiences. Parkinson and
Manstead (1993) have argued that findings from similar appraisal
manipulation studies might be the result of participants’ overfamiliarity with emotion stereotypes; that is, participants “know what
the conventional depiction of sadness in a narrative is like” (p. 305).
In the present case, this potential confound is not likely to be a
problem; it is doubtful that many participants are familiar with the
theory that attributions to effort produce authentic pride, whereas
attributions to ability produce hubristic pride. Furthermore, other

Participants
Undergraduate students enrolled in psychology courses (N ⫽
999; 70% female, 30% male) participated in exchange for course
credit.

Developing the Initial Item Pool
We began with the 77 pride-related words identified in Studies
2 and 3. To supplement this set, and to ensure that we were not
missing any important pride-related content, we used a thesaurus
to identify synonyms of words from the original set that had
received a mean prototypicality score of 4 or greater on a 5-point
scale. This procedure led to an expanded set of 104 words. Six
raters (undergraduate research assistants who had been extensively
trained to use the Pride Prototypicality scale) rated the pride
prototypicality of all words that had not been previously rated on
the same 5-point scale as was used in our previous research (Tracy
& Robins, 2004b, Study 2); interrater reliability was .83. We next
applied a prototypicality cut-off to the list of 104 words, retaining
only words with a mean prototypicality rating above 3.5. This
procedure reduced the set to 63 words. We then cut any remaining
11
It is worth noting that this strategy produces scales that are less
strongly intercorrelated (i.e., more independent) than the original oblimaxrotated factors found in Studies 2 and 3.

This document is copyrighted by the American Psychological Association or one of its allied publishers.
This article is intended solely for the personal use of the individual user and is not to be disseminated broadly.

STRUCTURE OF PRIDE

items that did not load more highly on the same factor across
Studies 2 and 3, following the criterion we had used for inclusion
in Study 4. This procedure reduced the set to 58 words.
Given our goal to develop scales that can be utilized quickly and
easily in a variety of samples, we next cut all multiword items
(e.g., high and mighty, nose in the air) and words that seemed
difficult for some undergraduate students to understand (e.g., hubristic, supercilious). We also cut positive evaluation words that
had no substantive content (e.g., positive, great), the word pride
(which should characterize both facets) and words that indicated
behaviors or actions rather than feeling states (e.g., swaggering,
smirking). These cuts reduced the total number of words to 40,
which were included in the present study; 22 items were related to
authentic pride, and 18 were related to hubristic pride.

Procedure
Participants rated the extent to which they “generally feel this
way” for all 40 pride-related words on a scale ranging from 1 (not
at all) to 5 (extremely).

Results and Discussion
We factor analyzed participants’ ratings of the 40 pride-related
words with oblimax rotation. As expected, a scree test suggested
two factors; eigenvalues for the first six factors were 14.3, 6.3, 1.3,
1.2, 1.1, and 0.9. The first two factors accounted for 51.6% of the
variance and correlated (.30). The first factor included all words
with primary loadings on the Authentic Pride factor in Study 2, and
the second factor included all words with primary loadings on the
Hubristic Pride factor in Study 2.
To determine which words to retain, we examined the pattern
matrix, which most clearly expresses the simple structure achieved
by an oblique rotation (Lee & Ashton, 2007). Given our goal of
developing scales that assess distinct facets, we adopted a stringent
criterion for retaining items: Each must load above .60 on its
primary factor and below .20 on the other. This criterion led to the
removal of 18 items, leaving 11 items related to authentic pride
and 11 related to hubristic pride.
We next computed alpha reliabilities on the two 11-item scales.
Alphas were .92 for both scales and were not improved by the
removal of any item. We thus retained these scales for the next
study in which we continued to refine the scales by examining
their factor structure and reliability in assessments of pride as a
momentary state.

Study 6
Study 6 used the relived emotion task (Ekman et al., 1983) to
invoke a pride experience and assessed resulting pride feelings
with the 22 pride-related words that emerged from Study 5. The
goal of the study was to further prune this set of words in order to
develop shorter yet comparably reliable scales.

Method
Participants
Undergraduate students enrolled in psychology courses (N ⫽
216; 69% female, 31% male) participated in exchange for course
credit.

519

Measures
As in Study 3, participants were instructed to “think about a time
when you felt very proud of yourself. . .describe the events that led
up to your feeling this way, in as much detail as you can remember.” After providing open-ended narrative responses, participants
rated the extent to which each of the 22 pride-related words that
emerged from Study 5 described their feelings during the event on
a scale ranging from 1 (not at all) to 5 (extremely).

Results and Discussion
We factor analyzed participants’ ratings with oblimax rotation.
A scree test suggested two factors; eigenvalues for the first six
factors were 6.3, 3.8, 1.2, 1.1, 1.0, and .9. The first two factors
accounted for 45.6% of the variance and correlated (.23). Again,
the two factors were clearly identified as Authentic Pride and
Hubristic Pride, and all of the items loaded on the appropriate
factor. However, in contrast to the typical order, Hubristic Pride
emerged as the first factor and Authentic Pride as the second
factor. This change in order suggests that the Hubristic Pride factor
might be an equally important component of pride and that it
emerged as a “second” factor in Studies 2, 3, and 5 because the
majority of words included in the analyses were associated with
authentic pride.
To determine which words to retain, we examined the factor
loadings in the pattern matrix. We retained the top seven loading
items from each scale with one exception. For the Authentic Pride
scale, we decided to retain the eighth highest loading item, productive, instead of the seventh highest loading item, self-confident,
which is very similar to confident (the highest loading item). This
decision was based on our goal of minimizing redundancy among
the items and capturing the full content domain of the construct.
The alpha reliabilities of the resultant 7-item scales were .84
(Authentic Pride) and .87 (Hubristic Pride).

Study 7
In Study 7, we tested whether the 7-item scales developed in
Studies 5 and 6 were reliable and showed the expected factor
structure in two independent samples—that is, one that assessed
pride as a trait and one that assessed pride as a state. We also
sought preliminary evidence of the validity of the scales by examining their correlations with variables that are theoretically and
empirically linked to pride. It is important to verify that the scales
retain the conceptual meaning of the facets, in terms of their
external correlates, despite our reduction of the original 77 items to
14. Specifically, we tested whether the Authentic Pride scale was
positively correlated with self-esteem, Extraversion, Agreeableness, Conscientiousness, and Emotional Stability; and whether the
Hubristic Pride scale was positively correlated with selfaggrandizing narcissism (narcissism controlling for self-esteem)
and shame-proneness and negatively with Agreeableness and Conscientiousness. Finally, we further address the question of whether
the two facets of pride are associated with distinct causal attributions by examining the scales’ correlations with a measure of
attributional style.

TRACY AND ROBINS

520
Method

Table 3
Factor Loadings of Pride Scale Items (Study 7)

Participants
Sample A. Undergraduate students enrolled in psychology
courses (n ⫽ 362; 65% female, 35% male) participated in exchange for course credit.
Sample B. Undergraduate students enrolled in psychology
courses (n ⫽ 348; 63% female, 37% male) participated in exchange for course credit.

This document is copyrighted by the American Psychological Association or one of its allied publishers.
This article is intended solely for the personal use of the individual user and is not to be disseminated broadly.

Measures
For Sample A, we used the trait pride procedure used in Study
5. For Sample B, we used the state pride procedure used in Study
6. In both samples, participants rated their level of pride on the two
7-item scales developed in Study 6, with all 14 items intermixed in
alphabetical order. The Authentic Pride scale included the words
accomplished, achieving, confident, fulfilled, productive, selfworth, and successful; and the Hubristic Pride scale included the
words arrogant, conceited, egotistical, pompous, smug, snobbish,
and stuck-up. (Depending on the word, the item stem was “I feel
like I am. . .,” “I feel like I have. . .,” or, for most words, “I
feel.. . .”)
Prior to participating in the study, participants in both samples
completed the RSE, the NPI, and the TOSCA-3; alpha reliabilities
were .90 and .90 for the RSE, .85 and .84 for the NPI, .79 and .79
for TOSCA-3 Shame, and .81 and .79 for TOSCA-3 Guilt, respectively, for Samples A and B. After completing the pride portion of
the study, participants completed the 48-item Multidimensional–
Multiattributional Causality Scale (MMCS; Lefcourt, von Baeyer,
Ware, & Cox, 1979). The MMCS assesses the tendency to attribute
achievement and affiliation events to effort, ability, luck, and
context. Alpha reliabilities for the two scales used here, Attributions to Effort and Attributions to Ability (across success and
failure outcomes), were .67 and .68, which are comparable to
values typically reported for the MMCS (Lefcourt, 1991).

Results and Discussion
Are the Scales Reliable?
For Sample A (trait pride), the Authentic Pride scale had an alpha
reliability of .88, and the Hubristic Pride scale had an alpha reliability
of .90. For Sample B (state pride), the Authentic Pride scale had an
alpha of .88, and the Hubristic Pride scale had an alpha of .90. These
reliabilities suggest that the scales have an adequate internal consistency, regardless of whether pride is assessed as a trait or as a state and
despite their relatively short length. Men scored higher than did
women on the Hubristic Pride scale in both Sample A, t(347) ⫽ 3.21,
p ⬍ .05 (Ms ⫽ 1.82 vs. 1.57), and Sample B, t(336) ⫽ 3.88, p ⬍ .05
(Ms ⫽ 1.88 vs. 1.57); there were no gender differences in authentic
pride in either sample (Ms ⫽ 3.21 and 3.11 for men and women,
respectively, in Sample A, and 4.20 for 4.20 for men and women,
respectively, in Sample B).

Do the Scales Capture the Structure of Pride?
To examine the structure of pride, we factor analyzed participants’ ratings of all 14 items with oblimax rotation. The scree test

Item
Snobbish
Pompous
Stuck-up
Conceited
Egotistical
Arrogant
Smug
Accomplished
Successful
Achieving
Fulfilled
Self-worth
Confident
Productive

Sample A (trait pride)a

Sample B (state pride)b

Authentic

Authentic

Hubristic
.84
.83
.80
.77
.70
.70
.69

.78
.77
.76
.70
.69
.68
.66

Hubristic
.88
.75
.84
.76
.70
.72
.63

.79
.78
.78
.71
.70
.71
.61

Note. Loadings below 0.15 are suppressed. Each word was preceded by
the stem I generally feel. . . (Sample A) or I feel. . . (Sample B), except for
achieving, which was preceded by I generally feel like I am. . . / I feel like
I am. . ., and self-worth, which was preceded by I generally feel like I
have. . . / I feel like I have. . .
a
N ⫽ 353. b N ⫽ 342.

revealed two factors for both Sample A (eigenvalues for the first
six unrotated factors were 4.7, 3.9, 0.8, 0.7 0.6, and 0.5) and
Sample B (eigenvalues ⫽ 4.9, 3.8, 0.7, 0.7, 0.6, and 0.6). The first
two factors accounted for 61.7% of the variance in Sample A and
61.9% of the variance in Sample B; the correlation between the
two rotated factors was .08 in Sample A and .14 in Sample B. As
Table 3 demonstrates, the data from both samples show a clean
two-factor structure; all items have high loadings on their primary
factor and relatively low loadings on the secondary factor.12

Correlates of Authentic Pride and Hubristic Pride
We next examined the correlates of the scales to test whether
they support our theoretical expectations and to replicate the
findings of Studies 2 and 3. We computed unit-weighted scale
scores by taking the mean of the seven items loading on each
factor. The resulting scales were fairly independent (Sample A:
r ⫽ .09, ns; Sample B: r ⫽ .14, p ⬍ .05).
Table 4 shows correlations of Authentic Pride and Hubristic Pride
with self-esteem, narcissism, shame-proneness, and the Big Five
personality dimensions. Results from both samples replicated the
findings of Studies 2 and 3. Specifically, regardless of whether pride
was assessed as a trait or as a state, authentic pride was positively
correlated with self-esteem, whereas hubristic pride was negatively
correlated with self-esteem. In contrast, authentic pride was positively
related to narcissism, but this relation was decreased when shared
variance with self-esteem was removed. The removal of this shared
12

A confirmatory factor analysis also provided support for the twofactor structure. The 2-factor model provided a good fit to the data, for both
Samples A and B, respectively: ␹2(75, N ⫽ 348) ⫽ 267.24, RMSEA ⫽
.084, pclose fit ⫽ .000; ␹2(75, N ⫽ 334) ⫽ 239.11, RMSEA ⫽ .079,
pclose fit ⫽ .000. In both samples, the two-factor model fit significantly
better than did the one-factor model ( p ⬍ .05).

STRUCTURE OF PRIDE

521

Table 4
Correlations of Authentic and Hubristic Pride 7-Item Scales With Self-Esteem, Narcissism,
Shame-Proneness, and the Big Five Factors (Study 7)
Sample A (trait pride)a

This document is copyrighted by the American Psychological Association or one of its allied publishers.
This article is intended solely for the personal use of the individual user and is not to be disseminated broadly.

Measure
RSE
NPI
Shame-pronenessc
Extraversion
Agreeableness
Conscientiousness
Emotional Stability
Openness

Authentic
*

*

.50 (.44 )
.32* (.20*)
⫺.28*
.39*
.19*
.38*
.28*
.29*

Sample B (state pride)b

Hubristic

Authentic

⫺.14 (⫺.20 )
.22* (.27*)
.09*
.11
⫺.26*
⫺.25*
⫺.05
.01
*

*

*

Hubristic
⫺.11 (⫺.18*)
.21* (.26*)
.17*
.09
⫺.17*
⫺.14*
⫺.10
.03

*

.35 (.29 )
.22* (.13*)
⫺.15*
.20*
.19*
.26*
.06
.14*

Note. Values in parentheses are partial correlations controlling for narcissism and self-esteem, respectively.
RSE ⫽ Rosenberg Self-Esteem Scale; NPI ⫽ Narcissistic Personality Inventory.
a
N ⫽ 348. b N ⫽ 334. c Shame-proneness scale is “guilt-free” shame (i.e., shame-proneness controlling for
guilt-proneness).
*
p ⬍ .05.

variance did not, however, decrease the positive correlation between
hubristic pride and narcissism, consistent with the view that hubristic
pride is positively related to the self-aggrandizing aspects of narcissism that remain when self-esteem is partialled out of the NPI. Also
replicating Studies 2 and 3, authentic pride was negatively correlated
with shame-proneness, whereas hubristic pride was positively correlated shame-proneness.
The correlations with the Big Five dimensions also generally
replicated the findings from Studies 2 and 3. As was found
previously, authentic pride was positively related to the more
adaptive and socially desirable traits, including Agreeableness and
Conscientiousness, whereas hubristic pride tended to be negatively
or not related to these same traits. The two facets also had significantly different ( p ⬍ .05) correlations with all five trait dimensions except for Emotional Stability and, in Sample B, Openness,
which is consistent with the previous finding that the two facets are
associated with divergent personality profiles.
In summary, individuals with genuine high self-esteem, who
were extraverted, agreeable, and conscientious, tended to experience authentic pride in response to a pride-eliciting event and were
more likely to be prone to feelings of authentic pride in their
everyday life. In contrast, self-aggrandizing, shame-prone, disagreeable, and nonconscientious individuals tended to experience
hubristic pride in response to a pride-eliciting event and to be
generally prone to feelings of hubristic pride in everyday life. This
pattern of findings is consistent with those of Studies 2 and 3 and
with theoretical accounts of the distinction between the facets.

Are Authentic Pride and Hubristic Pride Associated With
Distinct Attributional Styles?
To further address the question of whether authentic pride and
hubristic pride are associated with distinct causal attributions, we
examined correlations between the two pride scales and the tendency
to attribute success and failure to effort and ability. As was previously
mentioned, effort is typically viewed as an internal, unstable, controllable cause, whereas ability is typically viewed as an internal, stable,
uncontrollable cause (Lefcourt et al., 1979; Weiner, 1985). On the
basis of our theoretical model, we expected authentic pride to be

positively correlated with effort attributions and hubristic pride to be
positively correlated with ability attributions.
As shown in Table 5, results from both samples were generally
consistent with these predictions. Across the two studies, small but
significant correlations emerged for both scales, suggesting that
individuals who tend to attribute a range of events to effort also
tend to respond to events with authentic pride, whereas those who
tend to attribute such events to ability are more likely to respond
with hubristic pride.
To supplement these correlational findings, we also reanalyzed
the results of Study 4 with the newly developed 7-item scales as
dependent variables (␣ reliabilities ⫽ .84 and .90 for authentic and
hubristic pride in response to internal, stable attributions; .86 and
.92 in response to internal, unstable attributions; .78 and .90 to
internal, controllable attributions; and .91 and .94 to internal,
uncontrollable attributions). All significant findings reported in
Study 4 held with the new scales, including the predicted interactions between emotion and stability attributions, F(1, 79) ⫽ 22.36,
p ⬍ .05, and emotion and controllability interactions, F(1, 79) ⫽
59.80, p ⬍ .05, suggesting that individuals told to attribute success
to internal, unstable, controllable causes were more likely to respond with authentic pride than were individuals told to attribute
success to internal, stable, uncontrollable causes. Conversely, attributions to internal, uncontrollable causes led to greater hubristic
pride than did attributions to internal, controllable causes.
Table 5
Correlations of Authentic and Hubristic Pride 7-Item Scales
With Attributional Style (Study 7)
Sample A
(trait pride)a

Sample B
(state pride)b

Style

Authentic

Hubristic

Authentic

Hubristic

Effort attributions
Ability attributions

.17*
.02

⫺.10*
.09*

.25*
.07

.08
.17*

a
*

N ⫽ 356.
p ⬍ .05.

b

N ⫽ 345.

TRACY AND ROBINS

522

In summary, the findings of Study 7 provide preliminary support
for the validity of our new measures of authentic pride and hubristic
pride. The scales have high reliability and a clear two-factor structure
for both trait-based and state-based assessments of pride and show a
coherent pattern of relations with theoretically relevant variables.

This document is copyrighted by the American Psychological Association or one of its allied publishers.
This article is intended solely for the personal use of the individual user and is not to be disseminated broadly.

GENERAL DISCUSSION
The findings from the present research provide the first empirical portrait of the structure of pride and are consistent with
hypotheses derived from our theoretical model of self-conscious
emotions (Tracy & Robins, 2004a). First, we found that people
reliably distinguish between two dimensions of pride when they
think about the semantic meaning of pride-related words and when
they describe their pride feelings both over time and in response to
a single pride-eliciting event. Second, the two empirically derived
facets of pride fit with the theoretical distinction between authentic
pride and hubristic pride that emerges from theories of narcissism
and self-esteem (M. Lewis, 2000; Tracy & Robins, 2003). Each
empirical facet includes words relevant to the theoretical facet’s
meaning and shows predicted correlations with narcissism, selfesteem, and shame. In addition, the two facets are associated with
divergent Big Five profiles, such that authentic pride is related to
a more adaptive, prosocial, and achievement-motivated personality
profile. These empirical facets cannot be accounted for by distinctions in evaluative valence, activation, or the degree to which each
is perceived as a state versus a trait.
Third, the two facets are associated with distinct causal attributions. People report greater authentic pride when they attribute
their success to internal, unstable, and controllable causes than
when they attribute the same success to internal, stable, uncontrollable causes; in contrast, they report greater hubristic pride when
they attribute success to internal, stable, uncontrollable causes than
to internal, unstable, controllable causes. This finding emerged
from content-coded narratives of a real pride experience and from
experimental manipulation of causal attributions for a hypothetical
but ecologically valid success event. This finding also emerged
from correlations between dispositional attributional style and
pride; people who tend to make effort (unstable, controllable)
attributions also tend to report experiencing authentic pride,
whereas those who tend to make ability (stable, uncontrollable)
attributions tend to report experiencing hubristic pride.
The present research thus provides the first empirical evidence
for the theoretical distinction between authentic pride and hubristic
pride. The fact that the same two dimensions emerged from several
studies that used different methodologies and were replicated
across samples of words drawn from different sources (photos of
the pride expression and descriptions of the pride experience)
supports the robustness and conceptual meaningfulness of the
distinction between the facets. Furthermore, the two-factor structure of pride is supported by several pieces of evidence: (a) scree
tests from data collected in Studies 2, 3, 5, 6, and 7 suggest an
“elbow,” or clear break in the plot between the second and third
factor; (b) confirmatory factor analyses on data collected in Studies 2, 3, and 7 showed that a two-factor solution had a good fit to
the data and was significantly better fitting than a one-factor
solution; (c) the extraction and rotation of three factors in Studies
2 and 3 produced a third factor that was difficult to interpret and
included items that were not closely linked to pride; (d) the results

from the pathfinder analysis and the hierarchical cluster analyses
in Study 1 suggest a two-cluster structure; and (e) several different
theoretical perspectives, summarized in the introductory paragraphs (M. Lewis, 2000; Tangney et al., 1996; Tracy & Robins,
2004a), led us to predict two factors before collecting any data.
The present findings also address questions about the causal antecedents of the two facets of pride. The results of Study 3 suggest that
the two facets are not distinguished by the kinds of events that elicit
them—we found no differences in the types of events (achievement,
personal, familial, relationship, and athletic) that elicited each facet.
Thus, as appraisal theories of emotion suggest, it is not the specific
event, but rather how the event is appraised that determines which
emotion is experienced (e.g., Lazarus, 1991). However, given that we
coded participants’ descriptions only for broad-level categories, it
remains possible that there are more subtle distinctions in the kinds of
events that elicit the two facets. We hope that future research will
address this important issue.
The present research is also the first to inform about the appraisals
that matter for the two facets of pride. Studies 3, 4, and 7 suggest that
the type of internal attribution individuals make for a success is part
of what determines which facet of pride occurs in response. In Study
3, attributions about the stability of internal causes differentiated
between authentic pride and hubristic pride, as did attributions to the
specific causes of effort versus ability. In Study 4, both stability and
controllability distinguished between the facets. In Study 7, these
effects replicated with the newly developed 7-item scales measuring
authentic pride and hubristic pride. Thus, it seems clear that attributions about the controllability and stability of internal causes distinguish between authentic pride and hubristic pride. On the basis of
Study 4, stability attributions might play a somewhat less important
role, but their relative impact (compared with controllability attributions) warrants further investigation.
It is possible that the finding of a difference between the dimensions of stability and controllability was an artifact of the method
used—perhaps the controllability manipulation was simply stronger
than the stability manipulation, given that the controllability vignettes
provided more information. In fact, in other research that used similar
vignettes to manipulate shame and guilt, we found a similar effect of
controllability versus stability attributions (Tracy & Robins, 2006). Of
course, the parallel findings might also be due to the relatively greater
power of feeling that one has no control over something about oneself
versus feeling that a particular characteristic is a stable aspect of
oneself. It is also possible that controllability and stability are so
conceptually entwined that they cannot be easily disentangled experimentally or in people’s actual interpretations of the causes of events.
Previous theorists have pointed to causal factors such as laziness as
evidence that a cause can be controllable but stable (Dweck, 1999;
Weiner, 1985), but, to the extent that people can control their laziness,
it can change and is thus unstable. Laziness might therefore be seen as
controllable but not actually controlled, which raises broader questions about the precise meaning of different causal attributions. It is
unclear whether such fine-grained distinctions are relevant to the folk
attribution process. Future research should examine both whether lay
attributors distinguish between stable and uncontrollable causes and
whether such distinctions play a role in distinguishing between authentic and hubristic pride. Another caveat to the findings of Study 4,
in particular, is that the specific causes manipulated— effort versus
ability—might not fully capture the attribution dimensions of stability

This document is copyrighted by the American Psychological Association or one of its allied publishers.
This article is intended solely for the personal use of the individual user and is not to be disseminated broadly.

STRUCTURE OF PRIDE

and controllability, so our conclusions might be restricted to these
specific causes.
It is also important to note that attributions to internal, stable, and
uncontrollable causes are unlikely to be the only cognitive processes
that distinguish between hubristic and authentic pride. In fact, the
results of Study 4 suggest that participants do not frequently endorse
hubristic pride items even in conjunction with this exact set of attributions. Furthermore, the content of the words that fell into the
hubristic pride cluster (Study 1) and loaded highly onto the Hubristic
Pride factors (Studies 2 and 3) connotes more than a stable belief in
one’s perfection—the words also seem to convey a social comparison: that the self is better than others. Given that an individual could,
conceivably, be proud of his stable abilities without experiencing this
competitive aspect of hubristic pride, additional attributions might be
needed to experience hubristic pride. Perhaps, in addition to attributing success to stable, uncontrollable aspects of the self, one must also
attribute it to something about the self that others do not have. Future
research should explore whether hubristic pride requires downward
social comparisons or whether these comparisons produce a more
complex emotional response, such as hubristic pride blended with
contempt.
Finally, the present research used data from four independent
samples to develop new measures of authentic pride and hubristic
pride. These measures are brief, relatively independent, highly
reliable, and show a clear two-factor structure and theoretically
coherent relations with a number of other individual-difference
variables. These scales can be used to assess authentic pride and
hubristic pride, both as momentary experiences and as chronic
dispositional tendencies.

Implications
The present research provides the first empirical support for the
claim that pride is not a unitary construct, and that, instead, there
are unique authentic and hubristic facets. Our findings suggest that
these two facets are related yet distinct. Their intercorrelations
were fairly low in both Studies 2 and 3 (rs ⫽ .22 and .30), and they
had divergent correlations with self-esteem, shame-proneness, and
the Big Five dimensions of personality.
In many ways, the relation between the two dimensions of pride
seems similar to the relation between shame and guilt, the two major
negative self-conscious emotions. The two emotions tend to be intercorrelated yet have divergent correlations with other relevant variables, indicating that each emotion has meaningful unique variance.
Like shame and guilt, there are reliable and presumably measurable
individual differences in people’s tendencies to experience each of the
pride dimensions. Both pairs of self-conscious emotions are also
distinguished by the same causal attributions; shame and hubristic
pride tend to be elicited by internal, stable, uncontrollable attributions,
whereas guilt and authentic pride tend to be elicited by internal,
unstable, controllable attributions (Tracy & Robins, 2006). Finally,
like shame and guilt, one facet of pride— hubristic—seems to have
somewhat maladaptive correlates, whereas the other facet—
authentic—seems to have adaptive correlates.
These parallels raise the question: Are authentic pride and
hubristic pride two distinct emotions, as shame and guilt are
considered to be, or is it more accurate to view them as subfacets
of the same overarching emotion, pride? The present research does
not directly address this question, although it is fairly unusual for

523

a single emotion to include subfacets that have entirely opposite
personality correlates and that are elicited by distinct causal attributions. Nonetheless, further research is needed to explore this
question. Such research will need to address the ambiguity that
exists within the field about the precise prerequisites for a particular state to be considered a distinct emotion. Several important
directions, based on consensual definitions of emotion, might
include examining the extent to which the two facets generalize
across cultures (i.e., do individuals in non-Western cultures conceptualize and experience of pride in the same manner?) and are
associated with distinct nonverbal expressions (Ekman, 1992). In
one recent study, we found that the two facets are associated with
the same nonverbal expression, suggesting that, at least from a
behavioral perspective, it might be correct to consider them facets
of a single emotion (Tracy & Robins, 2006).
In general, the present findings point to the need for continued
research and theory on both facets of pride. Given that pride has been
classified as a “human universal” (D. E. Brown, 1991) and has
recently been shown to have a cross-culturally recognized nonverbal
expression (Tracy & Robins, 2006), it is likely that it is an evolved,
functional emotion. In our view, pride might have evolved to serve
two primary functions: (a) to reinforce prosocial behaviors and (b) to
enhance social status by informing the individual and his or her social
group of the individual’s success. To the extent that authentic and
hubristic pride are distinct emotions, they are likely to have evolved
somewhat separately in order to solve unique adaptive problems. For
example, authentic pride might motivate behaviors geared toward the
long-term attainment and maintenance of status, whereas hubristic
pride might be a “short-cut” solution, proving status that is more
immediate but fleeting. Alternatively, as is suggested by the correlations between the facets and the Big Five factors of personality,
authentic pride might promote status through relationship-oriented,
prosocial means (i.e., “getting along”), whereas hubristic pride might
promote status more by obtaining the admiration, if not the liking, of
others (i.e., “getting ahead”). In fact, this pattern of correlations, as
well as the correlations with self-esteem and narcissism, suggests that
hubristic pride might be associated with psychopathy or Machiavellianism—two personality dispositions that might have short-term
adaptive benefits despite causing long-term interpersonal problems
(Paulhus & Williams, 2002). More generally, the likely outcomes of
hubristic pride (e.g., boastfulness, competitiveness) might be adaptive
in situations in which it is advantageous to display one’s relative
superiority in order to intimidate an opponent.
Another possibility is that the two facets are associated with
distinct motivational orientations. Specifically, authentic pride
could be linked to mastery goals, whereas hubristic pride would be
more linked to performance goals (Dweck, 1999). The correlations
with narcissism are consistent with this interpretation, given previous findings that narcissists tend to be more motivated by performance than the mastery aspects of a task (Morf, Weir, &
Davidov, 2000). Future research examining whether the two facets
are associated with distinct behavioral outcomes (both for the
individual and his/her onlookers) would help address this issue.
The present findings are consistent with Rousseau’s (1754/
1984) claim that pride is a complex emotion that includes two
psychologically distinct facets. As the present research makes
evident, these two facets correspond to the theoretical dimensions
of authentic and hubristic pride.

TRACY AND ROBINS

524

This document is copyrighted by the American Psychological Association or one of its allied publishers.
This article is intended solely for the personal use of the individual user and is not to be disseminated broadly.

References
Brown, D. E. (1991). Human universals. Philadelphia: Temple University.
Brown, J. D., & Marshall, M. A. (2001). Self-esteem and emotion: Some
thoughts about feelings. Personality & Social Psychology Bulletin, 27,
575–584.
Bushman, B. J., & Baumeister, R. F. (1998). Threatened egotism, narcissism, self-esteem, and direct and displaced aggression: Does self-love or
self-hate lead to violence? Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 75, 219 –229.
Buss, A. H. (1980). Self-consciousness and social anxiety. San Francisco:
Freeman.
Campbell, W. K. (1999). Narcissism and romantic attraction. Journal of
Personality and Social Psychology, 77, 1254 –1270.
Dante, A. (1937). The divine comedy. London: J. M. Dent. (Original work
published 1308 –1321)
Diener, E., & Emmons, R. A. (1984). The independence of positive and
negative affect. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 47,
1105–1117.
Digman, J. M. (1997). Higher order factors of the Big Five. Journal of
Personality and Social Psychology, 73, 1246 –1256.
Dweck, C. S. (1999). Self-theories: Their role in motivation, personality,
and development. Philadelphia: Psychology Press/Taylor & Francis.
Ekman, P. (1992). An argument for basic emotions. Cognition & Emotion,
6, 169 –200.
Ekman, P. (2003). Emotions revealed. New York: Times Books.
Ekman, P., Levenson, R. W., & Friesen, W. V. (1983, September). Autonomic nervous system activity distinguishes among emotions. Science,
221, 1208 –1210.
Ellsworth, P. C., & Smith, C. A. (1988). Shades of joy: Patterns of
appraisal differentiating pleasant emotions. Cognition & Emotion, 2,
301–331.
Feldman-Barrett, L., & Russell, J. A. (1998). Independence and bipolarity
in the structure of current affect. Journal of Personality and Social
Psychology, 74, 967–984.
Goldberg, L. R., & Velicer, W. F. (2004). Principles of exploratory factor
analysis. In S. Strack (Ed.), Differentiating normal and abnormal personality (2nd ed., pp. 209 –237). New York: Springer.
Graziano, W. G., & Tobin, R. M. (2002). Agreeableness: Dimension of
personality or social desirability artifact? Journal of Personality, 70,
695–727.
Hart, D., & Matsuba, M. K. (in press). The development of pride and moral
life. In J. L. Tracy, R. W. Robins, & J. P. Tangney (Eds.), The selfconscious emotions: Theory and research. New York: Guilford.
Haslam, N., Bain, P., & Neal, D. (2004). The implicit structure of positive
characteristics. Personality & Social Psychology Bulletin, 30, 529 –541.
Herrald, M. M., & Tomaka, J. (2002). Patterns of emotion-specific appraisal,
coping, and cardiovascular reactivity during an ongoing emotional episode.
Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 83, 434 – 450.
John, O. P., & Srivastava, S. (1999). The Big Five trait taxonomy: History,
measurement, and theoretical perspectives. In L. A. Pervin & O. P. John
(Eds.), Handbook of personality: Theory and research (2nd ed., pp.
102–138). New York: Guilford Press.
Keltner, D., & Buswell, B. N. (1996). Evidence for the distinctness of
embarrassment, shame, and guilt: A study of recalled antecedents and
facial expressions of emotion. Cognition & Emotion, 10, 155–171.
Kernberg, O. F. (1975). Borderline conditions and pathological narcissism. New York: Jason Aronson.
Kernis, M. H. (2003). Toward a conceptualization of optimal self-esteem.
Psychological Inquiry, 14, 1–26.
Kishton, J. M., & Widaman, K. F. (1994). Unidimensional versus domain
representative parceling of questionnaire items: An empirical example.
Educational & Psychological Measurement, 54, 757–765.
Kohut, H. (1976). The restoration of the self. New York: International
Universities Press.

Lazarus, R. S. (1991). Emotion and adaptation. New York: Oxford University Press.
Leary, M. R., Tambor, E. S., Terdal, S. K., & Downs, D. L. (1995).
Self-esteem as an interpersonal monitor: The sociometer hypothesis.
Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 68, 518 –530.
LeDoux, J. E. (1996). The emotional brain: The mysterious underpinnings
of emotional life. New York: Simon & Schuster.
Lee, K., & Ashton, M. C. (2007). Factor analysis in personality research.
In R. W. Robins, R. C. Fraley, & R. Krueger (Eds.), Handbook of
research methods in personality psychology (pp. 424 – 443). New York:
Guilford Press.
Lefcourt, H. M. (1991). Locus of control. In J. P. Robinson, P. R. Shaver,
& L. S. Wrightsman (Eds.), Measures of personality and psychosocial
attitudes (pp. 413– 449). San Diego, CA: Academic Press.
Lefcourt, H. M., von Baeyer, C. L., Ware, E. E., & Cox, D. J. (1979). The
Multidimensional–Multiattributional Causality Scale: The development
of a goal-specific Locus of Control Scale. Canadian Journal of Behavioral Science, 11, 286 –304.
Levenson, R. W. (1992). Autonomic nervous system differences among
emotions. Psychological Science, 3, 23–27.
Lewis, H. B. (1971). Shame and guilt in neurosis. New York: International
Universities Press.
Lewis, M. (2000). Self-conscious emotions: Embarrassment, pride, shame,
and guilt. In M. Lewis & J. M. Haviland-Jones (Eds.), Handbook of
emotions (2nd ed., pp. 623– 636). New York: Guilford Press.
MacCallum, R. C., Widaman, K. F., Zhang, S., & Hong, S. (1999). Sample
size in factor analysis. Psychological Methods, 4, 84 –99.
Morf, C. C., & Rhodewalt, F. (2001). Unraveling the paradoxes of narcissism: A dynamic self-regulatory processing model. Psychological Inquiry, 12, 177–196.
Morf, C. C., Weir, C., & Davidov, M. (2000). Narcissism and intrinsic
motivation: The role of goal congruence. Journal of Experimental Social
Psychology, 36, 424 – 438.
Nolen-Hoeksema, S. (2000). The role of rumination in depressive disorders
and mixed anxiety/depressive symptoms. Journal of Abnormal Psychology, 109, 504 –511.
Ozer, D. J., & Benet-Martinez, V. (2006). Personality and the prediction of
consequential outcomes. Annual Review of Psychology, 57, 401– 421.
Parkinson, B., & Manstead, A. S. (1993). Making sense of emotion in
stories and social life. Cognition & Emotion, 7, 295–323.
Paulhus, D. L., Robins, R. W., Trzesniewski, K. H., & Tracy, J. L. (2004).
Two replicable suppressor situations in personality research. Multivariate Behavioral Research, 39, 301–326.
Paulhus, D. L., & Williams, K. M. (2002). The dark triad of personality:
Narcissism, Machiavellianism, and psychopathy. Journal of Research in
Personality, 36, 556 –563.
Peterson, C. (1991). The meaning and measurement of explanatory style.
Psychological Inquiry, 2, 1–10.
Raskin, R., & Terry, H. (1988). A principal-components analysis of the
Narcissistic Personality Inventory and further evidence of its construct validity. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 54,
890 –902.
Roberts, B. W., Chernyshenko, O. S., Stark, S., & Goldberg, L. R. (2005). The
structure of conscientiousness: An empirical investigation based on seven
major personality questionnaires. Personnel Psychology, 58, 103–139.
Robinson, M. D., & Clore, G. L. (2001). Simulation, scenarios, and
emotional appraisal: Testing the convergence of real and imagined
reactions to emotional stimuli. Personality & Social Psychology Bulletin, 27, 1520 –1532.
Roseman, I. J. (1991). Appraisal determinants of discrete emotions. Cognition & Emotion, 5, 161–200.
Rosenberg, M. (1965). Society and the adolescent self-image. Princeton,
NJ: Princeton University Press.

This document is copyrighted by the American Psychological Association or one of its allied publishers.
This article is intended solely for the personal use of the individual user and is not to be disseminated broadly.

STRUCTURE OF PRIDE
Rousseau, J. (1984). A discourse on inequality (M. Cranston, Trans.). New
York: Viking. (Original work published 1754)
Schvaneveldt, R. W. (Ed). (1990). Pathfinder associative networks: Studies
in knowledge organization. Ablex series in computational sciences.
Westport, CT: Ablex Publishing.
Smith, C. A., & Lazarus, R. S. (1993). Appraisal components, core relational themes, and the emotions. Cognition & Emotion, 7, 233–269.
Smith, H. S., Webster, J. M., Parrott, W. G., & Eyre, H. L. (2002). The role
of public exposure in moral and nonmoral shame and guilt. Journal of
Personality and Social Psychology, 83, 138 –159.
Tangney, J. P., & Dearing, R. L. (2002). Shame and guilt. New York:
Guilford Press.
Tangney, J. P., Miller, R. S., Flicker, L., & Barlow, D. H. (1996). Are
shame, guilt, and embarrassment distinct emotions? Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 70, 1256 –1269.
Tangney, J. P., Wagner, P., & Gramzow, R. (1989). The Test of SelfConscious Affect (TOSCA). Fairfax, VA: George Mason University.
Tracy, J. L., & Robins, R. W. (2003). “Death of a (narcissistic) salesman”:
An integrative model of fragile self-esteem. Psychological Inquiry, 14,
57– 62.
Tracy, J. L., & Robins, R. W. (2004a). Putting the self into self-conscious
emotions: A theoretical model. Psychological Inquiry, 15, 103–125.

525

Tracy, J. L., & Robins, R. W. (2004b). Show your pride: Evidence for a
discrete emotion expression. Psychological Science, 15, 194 –197.
Tracy, J. L., & Robins, R. W. (2006). Appraisal antecedents of shame and
guilt: Support for a theoretical model. Personality & Social Psychology
Bulletin, 32, 1339 –1351.
Tracy, J. L., & Robins, R. W. (2007). The nonverbal expression of pride:
Evidence for cross-cultural recognition. Manuscript submitted for publication.
Tracy, J. L., Robins, R. W., & Lagattuta, K. H. (2005). Can children
recognize the pride expression? Emotion, 5, 251–257.
Twenge, J. M., & Campbell, W. K. (2003). “Isn’t it fun to get the respect
we’re going to deserve?” Narcissism, social rejection, and aggression.
Personality & Social Psychology Bulletin, 29, 261–272.
Weiner, B. (1985). An attributional theory of achievement motivation and
emotion. Psychological Review, 92, 548 –573.
Weiner, B. (1991). An attributional look at explanatory style. Psychological Inquiry, 2, 43– 44.

Received August 12, 2005
Revision received September 5, 2006
Accepted October 23, 2006 䡲

