Ageing and Society
http://journals.cambridge.org/ASO

Additional services for Ageing and Society:


Email alerts: Click here
Subscriptions: Click here
Commercial reprints: Click here
Terms of use : Click here




Reminiscence and mental health: a review of
recent progress in theory, research and
interventions

GERBEN J. WESTERHOF, ERNST BOHLMEIJER and JEFFREY DEAN
WEBSTER

Ageing and Society / Volume 30 / Issue 04 / May 2010, pp 697 - 721
DOI: 10.1017/S0144686X09990328, Published online: 01 March 2010

Link to this article: http://journals.cambridge.org/abstract_S0144686X09990328

How to cite this article:
GERBEN J. WESTERHOF, ERNST BOHLMEIJER and JEFFREY DEAN
WEBSTER (2010). Reminiscence and mental health: a review of recent progress
in theory, research and interventions. Ageing and Society, 30, pp 697-721
doi:10.1017/S0144686X09990328

Request Permissions : Click here




Downloaded from http://journals.cambridge.org/ASO, IP address: 138.251.14.35 on 19 Mar 2015
Ageing & Society 30, 2010, 697–721. f Cambridge University Press 2010                697
doi:10.1017/S0144686X09990328 Printed in the United Kingdom



Reminiscence and mental health : a review
of recent progress in theory, research and
interventions
GERBEN J. WESTERHOF*, ERNST BOHLMEIJER* and
JEFFREY DEAN WEBSTER#


ABSTRACT
This article explores recent progress in theory, research and practical applications
of reminiscence. It ﬁrst describes the evidence for reminiscence as a naturally
occurring process, and discusses the diﬀerent functions of reminiscence and their
relationships with mental health and lifespan processes. Three basic types of
reminiscence that relate to mental health are speciﬁed : conversations about
autobiographical memories and the use of personal recollections to teach and
inform others have social functions; positive functions for the self include the
integration of memories into identity, recollections of past problem-solving
behaviours, and the use of memories to prepare for one’s own death ; negative
functions for the self are the use of past memories to reduce boredom, to revive
bitterness, or to maintain intimacy with deceased persons. It is proposed that
in interventions the three types are addressed diﬀerently : simple reminiscence
stimulates social reminiscence and bonding and promotes positive feelings ; life
review uses the positive functions to enhance personal wellbeing ; and life-review
therapy seeks to reduce the negative uses and thereby alleviate symptoms of
mental illness. Studies of the eﬀectiveness of interventions have provided some
evidence that interventions are eﬀective in relation to their goals. The review
closes with recommended directions for future reminiscence research.


KEY WORDS – reminiscence, life review, mental health, lifespan processes,
psychological interventions.


Introduction

Reminiscence has attracted much attention from gerontology researchers.
Many acclaimed scholars, including Bühler, Jung, Havighurst and
Neugarten, have argued that reminiscence is a ‘ natural process ’ through

* Department of Psychology and Communication of Health and Risk, University of
  Twente, Enschede, The Netherlands.
# Department of Psychology, Langara College, Vancouver, Canada.




http://journals.cambridge.org   Downloaded: 19 Mar 2015                 IP address: 138.251.14.35
   698     Gerben J. Westerhof et al.

   which positive and negative memories are balanced in the light of life’s
   ﬁnitude. In his stage theory of lifespan development, Erikson (1959) most
   clearly formulated the last stage of life as a period of life review. A suc-
   cessful life review achieves an integrated view of one’s past life, including
   positive memories and achievements alongside the reconciliation and ac-
   ceptance of failures and disappointments, and results ideally in wisdom,
   the experience of meaning in life, and the acceptance of one’s own death.
   It was Butler’s (1963) seminal article, ‘ The life-review : an interpretation of
   reminiscence in the aged ’, which initiated the ﬁrst empirical studies and
   practical applications of reminiscence among older people. Previously
   reminiscence had often been seen as a corollary of cognitive decline, but
   Butler argued that life review has a positive function in helping a person
   come to terms with unresolved conﬂicts from the past and with his or her
   approaching vulnerability and death. The process of life review would
   thus be functional for older adults from a mental health perspective. In the
   late 1980s and early 1990s, several reviews of the early work were pub-
   lished (Haight 1991; Kovach 1990; Molinari and Reichlin 1984; Thornton
   and Brotchie 1987 ; Webster 1994 ; Webster and Haight 1995). They gen-
   erally concluded that there was a need for more precise deﬁnitions and
   measurements and better studies of the eﬀects of interventions.
      For the last two decades, researchers have responded to these criticisms
   and instigated a new phase of reminiscence research, which is the subject
   of this review. We ﬁrst discuss accounts of reminiscence as a ‘naturally
   occurring process ’, deﬁne the phenomenon and describe its diﬀerent types
   and functions. In the second section, we discuss the evidence for the
   relationship between reminiscence and mental health. The third section
   relates reminiscence to lifespan processes, and in the ﬁnal section we
   consider the implications of recent research on reminiscence as a social or
   therapeutic intervention, including the diﬀerent functions it achieves and
   its role in restoring and optimising mental health.

   Reminiscence as a naturally occurring process
   Deﬁnitions of reminiscence
   Although in everyone’s vocabulary reminiscence refers to the recall of
   memories about one’s own life, it has proven diﬃcult to provide a robust
   scientiﬁc deﬁnition (Fitzgerald 1996). The most inclusive deﬁnition is that
   provided by Bluck and Levine (1998: 188). It incorporates all aspects of the
   phenomenon of remembering our lives and is adopted in this review:
   Reminiscence is the volitional or non-volitional act or process of recollecting
   memories of one’s self in the past. It may involve the recall of particular or generic
   episodes that may or may not have been previously forgotten, and that are




http://journals.cambridge.org   Downloaded: 19 Mar 2015                 IP address: 138.251.14.35
                                              Reminiscence and mental health : a review    699

accompanied by the sense that the remembered episodes are veridical accounts of
the original experiences. This recollection from autobiographical memory may
be private or shared with others.

We stress three important elements of this deﬁnition. First, it makes clear
that reminiscence is something which happens to us all in our everyday
lives, whether we share our memories or not. This is the basis for de-
scribing reminiscence as a ‘ naturally occurring phenomenon’ throughout
the lifespan. Second, the deﬁnition draws attention to the fact that
memories of our lives can be wilfully recollected, and even that memories
thought to be forgotten can be recalled. This volitional recall is the
cornerstone for reminiscence as a useful intervention. Third, it describes
memories as veridical (‘ speaking, telling, or relating the truth; truthful,
veracious’, Oxford English Dictionary online). It is nowadays generally
understood that remembering not only involves the simple recall of in-
stances from long-term memory, but also that memories are reconstructed
in relation to existing schemas about the self, and vice versa (Bluck and
Levine 1998; Conway, Singer and Tagini 2004; Wilson and Ross 2003).
When memories are shared with other persons, the retelling is tuned to the
social situation at hand (Marsh 2007; Pasupathi 2001). This reconstructive
nature of reminiscence makes it diﬃcult to grasp, yet it also provides a
second cornerstone for believing that reminiscence interventions can be
beneﬁcial.

Types of reminiscence and their measurement
Bluck and Levine’s deﬁnition makes clear that reminiscence has diﬀerent
forms, but which have been distinguished? While the earliest reminiscence
researchers recognised there are diﬀerent types (e.g. Coleman 1974, 1986;
Lo Gerfo 1980; McMahon and Rhudick 1964), more recent scholars have
attempted to measure their relative frequencies in informants’ self-reports
(Habegger and Blieszner 1990; Havighurst and Glasser 1972; Merriam
1993; Santor and Zuroﬀ 1994) and by content analysis (Kovach 1995).
These early taxonomies and measures were limited, however, and not
widely adopted (Webster 2003).
   Wong and Watt (1991) made the ﬁrst substantial attempt to develop an
empirically grounded taxonomy of reminiscence on the basis of previous
research and using content analysis of a large corpus of reminiscence data.
They asked 200 community-dwelling subjects and 200 people living in
institutions aged 65 or more years to ‘tell something about your past that is
most important to you – that is something that has had the most inﬂuence
on your life ’ (1991: 275). An exhaustive and reliable coding scheme was
developed to score the responses into the diﬀerent reminiscence types, and




http://journals.cambridge.org   Downloaded: 19 Mar 2015                        IP address: 138.251.14.35
   700     Gerben J. Westerhof et al.

   six forms were identiﬁed (see Table 1, column 2). Integrative reminiscence
   refers to the type of life review recognised in the early literature, although
   not all instances are necessarily related to death preparation. Instrumental
   reminiscence includes recollections of one’s planning and coping beha-
   viours in the past. Transmissive reminiscence involves telling memories to
   inform younger generations about one’s cultural heritage or personal
   legacy. Narrative reminiscence concerns recounting autobiographical in-
   formation and past anecdotes. Escapist reminiscence refers to positive
   recollections, expressing nostalgia for the past. Obsessive reminiscence, by
   contrast, reiterates negative memories, and is evinced by guilt, bitterness
   and despair.
      Webster (1993, 1997) used factor analysis to distinguish diﬀerent uses of
   reminiscence. The resulting Reminiscence Functions Scale (RFS) has 43
   items that begin with the stem, ‘When I reminisce it is’ and continue with
   a selected speciﬁc purpose, for example ‘ to reduce boredom’. The items
   generate eight components or sub-scales that have good reliability, most
   above 0.8. Webster (1997 : 140) labelled these as:
   Identity : The existential use of the past to discover, clarify or crystallise our
   sense of who we are.
   Death preparation : The way we use our past in order to arrive at a calm and
   accepting attitude towards our own mortality.
   Problem solving : The use of reminiscence as a constructive coping
   mechanism by remembering past problem-solving strategies.
   Teach/inform : An instructional type of reminiscence to relay personal
   experiences and life lessons to others.
   Conversation: The informal use of memories in order to connect or re-
   connect to others.
   Boredom reduction : Thinking back about the past to escape an under-
   stimulating environment or a lack of engagement in goal-directed ac-
   tivities.
   Bitterness revival : The recall of memories about unjust treatments, providing
   the justiﬁcation to maintain negative thoughts and emotions to others.
   Intimacy maintenance : A process whereby cognitive and emotional re-
   presentations of important people in our lives are resurrected in lieu of the
   remembered person’s physical appearance.
     Although Webster used a very diﬀerent methodology, six factors of the
   RFS correspond by and large to the six types distinguished by Wong and
   Watt (1991) (see Table 1, columns 2 and 3). They saw death preparation as
   part of integrative reminiscence (1991 : 273), so intimacy maintenance is
   the only type of reminiscence that Webster added to Wong and Watt’s
   typology.




http://journals.cambridge.org   Downloaded: 19 Mar 2015             IP address: 138.251.14.35
    T A B L E 1. The types and functions of reminiscence
                                                                                  Author(s) and source publication
                               Wong and                                  Cappeliez            Bluck and                               Cappeliez and           Bluck et al.
                               Watt (1991)        Webster (1994)        et al. (2007)         Alea (2002)           Webster (2003)   O’Rourke (2006)             (2005)

    1                      2                  3                       4                   5                     6                     7                   8
    Approach or            Content analysis   Factor analysis         Theoretical         Theoretical re:       Secondary             Structural          Correlation
      type of analysis                                                  approach            autobiographical      factor and            equation           analysis
                                                                                            memories              discriminant          models
                                                                                                                  analyses
    Functions              Instrumental       Problem solving        Guidance             Directive             Self, pro-active      Self, positive      Directive, self




                                                                                                                                                                             Reminiscence and mental health : a review
                           Integrative        Identity               Self, positive       Self                  Self, pro-active      Self, positive      Directive, self
                           –                  Death preparation      Self, positive       Self                  Social, reactive      Self, positive      –
                           –                  Intimacy               Social, negative     Social                Social, reactive      Self, negative      –
                                               maintenance
                           Escapist           Boredom reduction       Self, negative      –                     Self, reactive        Self, negative      –
                           Obsessive          Bitterness revival      Self, negative      –                     Self, reactive        Self, negative      –
                           Transmissive       Teach, inform           Guidance            Social                Social,               Pro-social          –
                                                                                                                 pro-active
                           Narrative          Conversation            Social,             Social                Social, pro-active    Pro-social          Nurturing rels
                                                                       positive
                           –                  –                       –                   –                     –                     –                   Developing rels

    Note : rels: relationships.




                                                                                                                                                                             701




http://journals.cambridge.org                             Downloaded: 19 Mar 2015                                                          IP address: 138.251.14.35
   702     Gerben J. Westerhof et al.

      It is tempting to try to reduce the eight diﬀerent functions to a smaller
   number. Cappeliez, Rivard and Guindon (2007) argued that there are
   three main clusters of reminiscence functions (see Table 1, column 4). The
   ﬁrst are mainly directed towards the self and concern the striving for
   meaning and coherence in life. The associated positive functions for the
   self are identity construction and death preparation, whereas negative
   self-functions are boredom reduction and bitterness revival. The second
   cluster relates to social bonding and emotion regulation and includes in-
   timacy maintenance as a negative function and conversation as a positive
   function. The last cluster, called guidance, relates to private or shared
   knowledge and experience, and has the reminiscence functions of problem
   solving and teaching or informing others.
      Bluck and Alea (2002) also tried to reduce the number of functions using
   theory. They compared the functions of reminiscence to three functions
   of autobiographical memory: self, directive, and social (see Table 1,
   column 5), and argued that identity construction and death preparation
   are functional for the self, most importantly to maintain continuity.
   Problem-solving reminiscence matches the directive function of auto-
   biographical memory, whereas teaching/informing, conversation and
   intimacy maintenance correspond to the social function. Bitterness revival
   and boredom reduction did not match any of the functions of auto-
   biographical memory. These theoretical clusters of reminiscence functions
   arrange well the reminiscence self-functions, but there is some dis-
   agreement about whether teaching/informing belongs to the guidance or
   the social cluster. One way to resolve this theoretical inconsistency is to
   study the empirical relations between the occurrences of diﬀerent types of
   reminiscence.

   Recent empirical evidence
   Webster (2003) conducted a secondary factor analysis and a discriminant
   analysis on the eight reminiscence functions, using data from four inde-
   pendent studies with participants aged from 17 to 96 years. The functions
   could be arranged in a circumplex model with two axes : self versus social
   and reactive/loss-oriented versus pro-active/growth-oriented (see Table 1,
   column 6). The identity construction and problem-solving functions fall
   in the pro-active self quadrant, conversation and teaching/informing
   in the pro-active social quadrant, intimacy maintenance and death prep-
   aration in the reactive social quadrant, and bitterness revival and boredom
   reduction in the reactive self quadrant. Webster (2003) acknowledged
   that this ordering of reminiscence functions was tentative, particularly the
   position of death preparation.




http://journals.cambridge.org   Downloaded: 19 Mar 2015         IP address: 138.251.14.35
                                              Reminiscence and mental health : a review     703

   Using data from a study with participants aged between 50 and 84
years, Cappeliez and O’Rourke (2006) partly replicated these ﬁndings
using structural equation modelling (see Table 1, column 7). They found
three rather than four factors, splitting the factor that combined death
preparation and intimacy maintenance. Death preparation loaded on the
same factor as identity construction and problem solving, which they
labelled self-positive. Intimacy maintenance loaded together with bitter-
ness revival, and boredom reduction on a factor called self-negative. To
teach and to converse made up the third pro-social factor, similar to that
found by Webster (2003).
   Bluck et al. (2005) carried out an empirical study among undergraduate
students on the relation between functions of autobiographical memory
and uses of reminiscence. They constructed a scale called Thinking About
Life Experiences (TALE) to measure the self, directive and social functions
of autobiographical memory. The scale showed four factors with the social
function being bi-dimensional: self-continuity, directive, nurturing re-
lationships, and developing relationships. Bluck and colleagues correlated
the four sub-scales of TALE with the eight sub-scales of Webster’s RFS,
and applied the criterion of a minimum correlation coeﬃcient of 0.50 to
identify associations (see Table 1, column 8). The factors self-continuity,
directive, and nurturing relations showed high correlations with respect-
ively Identity, Problem Solving, and Conversation of the RFS. These
ﬁndings evince the concurrent validity of both scales. Self-continuity also
related to Problem Solving, however, and the directive function also cor-
related with Identity, suggesting that the discriminant validity of the sub-
scales may not be high. The TALE sub-scale Developing Relationships
was not strongly related to RFS sub-scales, and the other RFS sub-scales
were not highly correlated with the other TALE sub-scales.
   It has become clear that reminiscence has many diﬀerent forms. At least
eight uses of reminiscence have been reliably distinguished by diﬀerent
types of research. The RFS is the best available way to assess these dif-
ferent uses (Webster 1993, 1997), but it remains an open question whether
the eight uses are really distinct or correlate strongly enough to justify
a more parsimonious taxonomy. The two most contested issues, both
theoretically and empirically, relate to (a) the position of intimacy main-
tenance and death preparation, and (b) whether identity construction and
problem solving are distinct or similar functions. These contested issues
derive partly from the diversity of reminiscence’s functions. Our view is
that more clarity will come when the diﬀerent uses of reminiscence are
studied in relation to individual functions. As it has often been argued that
reminiscence impacts on mental health, the following section focuses on
the evidence for this relationship. The reasoning is that if diﬀerent uses of




http://journals.cambridge.org   Downloaded: 19 Mar 2015                        IP address: 138.251.14.35
   704     Gerben J. Westerhof et al.

   reminiscence have similar relations to mental health, they can be con-
   sidered as similar types.


   Reminiscence and mental health

   Although it has long been assumed that reminiscence is adaptive in old
   age, studies in the early years of reminiscence research produced con-
   ﬂicting results (Wong and Watt 1991), which might be because they ad-
   dressed diﬀerent types of reminiscence, or because initially it was not
   recognised that life review can be obsessive or stagnant (Coleman 1986).
   Along with the increased awareness of the diﬀerent types and uses
   of reminiscence in recent years, the focus has shifted from whether
   reminiscence is adaptive to determining which types are adaptive.
   Unfortunately, almost all studies to date of the relationship between
   reminiscence and mental health have been cross-sectional (see Coleman
   1986 for an exception based on qualitative case studies). It is therefore
   impossible to draw conclusions about causality: particular uses of remi-
   niscence might result in better mental health, but better mental health
   might also lead to particular uses of reminiscence.
      Six studies have used the RFS in relation to mental health, as
   summarised in Table 2. Webster (1998) and Webster and McCall (1999)
   found that reminiscence functions are related to happiness. Bitterness
   revival, boredom reduction, identity construction and problem solving
   were negatively related to happiness, whereas conversation and teaching/
   informing were positively related to feelings of happiness. Cully, LaVoie
   and Gfeller (2001) found that state and trait anxiety correlated with bit-
   terness revival, boredom reduction and death preparation, whereas de-
   pression associated only with bitterness revival. Using a canonical analysis
   of reminiscence functions, indicators of mental health and personality
   traits, they identiﬁed two canonical variates. The ﬁrst suggested that
   individuals with lower levels of anxiety and depression and who are less
   neurotic and more agreeable tend to use reminiscence comparatively
   infrequently for bitterness revival, boredom reduction and death prep-
   aration. The second variate suggested that individuals high on extra-
   version and openness and with lower levels of depression tend to reminisce
   frequently for teaching and conversing.
      Cappeliez and O’Rourke (2002) studied the relation between remi-
   niscence functions and meaning in life after controlling for personality
   traits. They found that a lower score on goal-seeking as a component of
   meaning in life related to a greater use of boredom reduction, bitterness
   revival and death preparation, and a higher score on existential vacuum,




http://journals.cambridge.org   Downloaded: 19 Mar 2015        IP address: 138.251.14.35
    T A B L E 2. Relationships between reminiscence functions and wellbeing
                                                                                                                                       Uses of reminisence3




                                                                                                                                          Conversation
                                                                                                                                                                                  Death         Intimacy
                                                                                                                 Problem   Teaching,                     Boredom     Bitterness
                           Mental health                                                              Identity   solving   informing                     reduction   revival      preparation   maintenance
    Study                   construct           Instruments1        Sample2         Analysis

    Webster (1998)        Happiness           MUNSH                 99 OA,     Correlation            x           x          +            +                x           x             0             0
                                                                     96 YA
    Webster and           Happiness           MUNSH                 268 A      Correlation             0          x          +            +                x           x             0             0
     McCall (1999)
    Cully et al. (2001)   State anxiety       STAI                  83 OA      Correlation            0            0          0             0              +           +            +             0
                          Trait anxiety       STAI                                                    0            0          0             0              +           +            +             0
                          Death anxiety       TDAS                                                    +            0          0             0              +           +            +             +




                                                                                                                                                                                                              Reminiscence and mental health : a review
                          Depression          BDI-II                                                  0            0          0             0              0           +            0             0
    Cappeliez and         Existential         LAP-R                 89 OA      Regression with
     O’Rourke (2002)       vacuum                                               personality trait
                                                                                controls               0           0          0             0              0           0            +              0
                          Goal seeking        LAP-R                                                    0           0          0             0              x           x            x              0
    Cappeliez             Life satisfaction   SWLS                  420 OA     Regression              0           0          0             0              x           x            +              0
     et al. (2005)        Psychiatric         GHQ
                           distress                                                                    0           0          0             0              +           +             0            +
    Cappeliez and         Wellbeing           SWLS GHQ              412 OA     Structural equation
     O’Rourke (2006)                           self-rated health,
                                               health conditions                                      +           +           0             0              x           x            +             x

    Notes : 1. MUNSH : Memorial University of Newfoundland Scale of Happiness (Kozma, Stones and McNeil 1990). STAI: State–Trait Anxiety Inventory
    (Spielberger, Gorsuch and Lushene 1970). TDAS: Templer-McMordie Death Anxiety Scale (McMordie 1979). BDI-II: Beck Depression Inventory, revised (Beck,
    Steer and Brown 1996). LAP-R: Life Attitude Proﬁle, revised (Reker 1992). SWLS: Satisfaction With Life Scale (Diener et al. 1985). GHQ : General Health
    Questionnaire (Goldberg 1978). 2. A: adults. OA: older adults. YA: younger adults. 3. 0 indicates no relation;+indicates a positive relation (e.g. more teaching/
    informing is related to higher levels of happiness); xindicates a negative relation (e.g. more boredom reduction is related to lower levels of happiness).
                                                                                                                                                                                                              705




http://journals.cambridge.org                            Downloaded: 19 Mar 2015                                                                             IP address: 138.251.14.35
   706     Gerben J. Westerhof et al.

   indicating a lack of meaning in life, related to a higher score on death
   preparation. A recent study of 420 adults with a mean age of 61 years
   investigated the association of reminiscence functions with life satisfaction
   and psychological distress (Cappeliez, O’Rourke and Chaudhury 2005).
   When controlling for personality traits, boredom reduction and bitterness
   revival related to lower life satisfaction, whereas death preparation related
   to higher life satisfaction. Boredom reduction, bitterness revival and
   maintenance of intimacy with deceased persons related to psychological
   distress, but these associations could be explained by personality traits.
   Cappeliez and O’Rourke (2006) calibrated a structural equations model
   using the same data that related reminiscence functions to wellbeing
   (including life satisfaction, psychological distress, perceived health, and
   health conditions). The reminiscence functions of identity, death prep-
   aration and problem solving positively related to wellbeing, and the
   functions of boredom reduction, bitterness revival, and intimacy main-
   tenance were negatively related, but the pro-social functions conversation
   and teaching/informing were unrelated.
      To sum up, studies have produced inconsistent ﬁndings, in part because
   they have used diﬀerent measures of mental health. The ﬁndings for bit-
   terness revival and boredom reduction are the most consistent: these uses
   of reminiscence are negatively related to almost all the aspects of mental
   health that have been studied. Intimacy maintenance also shows a nega-
   tive relation to mental health, but not for all aspects. Conversation and
   teaching or informing tend to be unrelated to mental health, with the
   exception of a positive association with happiness. Some studies have
   found that identity, problem solving and death preparation are negatively
   related to mental health, and some have found positive associations.
      Earlier in the paper we reviewed the various attempts to classify the uses
   of reminiscence, as summarised in Table 1. The evidence from studies of
   the relationships between diﬀerent forms of reminiscence and mental
   health supports the view that some ways of reminiscing are not only
   similar from a theoretical perspective and in terms of their factor structure,
   but also in their relation with mental health : bitterness revival and bore-
   dom reduction are similarly dysfunctional, whereas conversation and
   teaching/informing tend to be unrelated to mental health, with the ex-
   ception of their positive relation to happiness. Studies on the relations of
   reminiscence with mental health shed a new light on the two remaining
   inconsistencies in the classiﬁcation of reminiscence functions. First, the
   position of death preparation and intimacy maintenance remained un-
   clear. At least from a mental health perspective, the function of death
   preparation is similar to those of identity construction and problem sol-
   ving, whereas intimacy maintenance has similar dysfunctional outcomes




http://journals.cambridge.org   Downloaded: 19 Mar 2015          IP address: 138.251.14.35
                                              Reminiscence and mental health : a review     707

to those of bitterness revival and boredom reduction. Second, although
identity construction and problem solving are theoretically distinct, it
proved diﬃcult to distinguish them empirically. The evidence that they
associate similarly with mental health supports the conclusion that both
functions are similar, which has added plausibility when reminiscence is
related to theories about lifespan processes.


Lifespan processes

It was long assumed that reminiscence is speciﬁc to late life and universal
among older people, but evidence is accumulating that neither is the case.
Coleman (1986) was one of the ﬁrst to show that reminiscence is not
universal, and that it is not always useful for adaptation to later life. He
distinguished reminiscers and non-reminiscers in a sample of 50 older
people and found cases of low and high morale in both groups. Some
(42 % of the 50) reminiscers valued their memories of the past, and some
(16 %) were troubled by their memories. Some (30 %) non-reminiscers saw
no point in looking back, and some (12 %) more or less actively avoided
looking back because of contrasts between their past and present lives.
Using a single dichotomous question on life review put to older re-
spondents, Merriam (1993) found that about 54 per cent reported that
they had or were currently engaged in a life review. Wink and Schiﬀ
(2002) rated the responses to interviews that covered all main aspects
of current and past psychological and social functioning on a ﬁve-point
scale to indicate the level of life review in the transcript: 22 per cent
had used reminiscence to reach a new level of self-understanding (score
4 or 5), 20 per cent showed emotional involvement in the process of
reminiscing without evidence for new self-understanding, and the re-
mainder had not used reminiscence or only gave descriptions of past
personal events. Reminiscence is therefore not a universal phenomenon in
old age.
   Other studies have shown that reminiscence is also not distinctive to old
age. Using simple questions on the frequency of reminiscing, Merriam and
Cross (1982) and Hyland and Ackerman (1988) found that adolescents
reminisced as often as older adults, and that middle-aged people re-
minisced less frequently. Recent studies using the RFS have consistently
shown that there are no age diﬀerences in the total amount of reminiscing
(Rybash and Hrubi 1997; Webster 1995, 1998, 2002; Webster and Gould
2007; Webster and McCall 1999). Pasupathi and Carstensen (2003) studied
age diﬀerences in emotional experiences during mutual reminiscence in
adulthood, and found that age was unrelated to the amount of such




http://journals.cambridge.org   Downloaded: 19 Mar 2015                        IP address: 138.251.14.35
   708     Gerben J. Westerhof et al.

   reminiscence. As their study used experience sampling, the ﬁndings would
   not be aﬀected by the bias in self-report methods used in other studies.
       Although the total amount of reminiscence does not vary by age,
   younger and older adults use it for diﬀerent purposes. Younger adults
   consistently report reminiscing more often for bitterness revival, boredom
   reduction, identity construction and problem solving, whereas older adults
   report reminiscing more frequently for death preparation and to teach/
   inform others (Rybash and Hrubi 1997; Webster 1995, 1998, 2002 ;
   Webster and Gould 2007; Webster and McCall 1999). All studies agree
   that there are no age diﬀerences in reminiscing to make conversation.
   Some studies have shown that older persons score higher on intimacy
   maintenance (Webster 1995, 1998; Webster and Gould 2007), whereas
   others have not (Rybash and Hrubi 1997; Webster 2002 ; Webster and
   McCall 1999). Interestingly, the ﬁnding that older people use reminiscence
   more often for death preparation is in line with the earlier assumption that
   life review is a distinctive characteristic of old age. It is by broadening the
   deﬁnition of reminiscence that it becomes clear that it is not reminiscence
   as such that is characteristic of old age, but its distinctive uses.
       The recent empirical studies have shown unequivocally that remi-
   niscence is a lifespan phenomenon, which interestingly goes hand-in-hand
   with a theoretical shift. Psychological theories on ageing have increasingly
   taken a lifespan perspective, rather than conceiving old age as a distinct
   phase of life. Reminiscence is therefore no longer seen as an adaptation to
   the increasing awareness of one’s ﬁnitude, but as an important process in
   regulating individual development throughout the lifespan. Scholars such
   as Whitbourne (1985), Thorne (2000) and Pasupathi, Weeks and Rice
   (2006) describe remembering as a key process in development from early
   to late adulthood. This basic idea has been developed in at least three
   theories on lifespan development.

   Reminiscence and theories of lifespan development
   One psychological theory that has been applied to reminiscence is the
   socio-emotional selectivity theory (Carstensen 1995, 2006). This proposes that
   individuals have two important motives in life : emotion regulation and
   information gain. In later life, motivational priorities shift so that the
   regulation of emotional states becomes more important than information
   gain. This theory emphasises that it is not age as such but the awareness of
   endings which originates this shift. One important ﬁnding of socio-
   emotional selectivity is known as the ‘ positivity’ eﬀect: ‘a developmental
   pattern that has emerged in which a selective focus on negative stimuli in
   youth shifts to a relatively stronger focus on positive information in old




http://journals.cambridge.org   Downloaded: 19 Mar 2015           IP address: 138.251.14.35
                                              Reminiscence and mental health : a review     709

age ’ (Carstensen 2006: 1915). Socio-emotional selectivity theory has been
applied to reminiscence in the work of Pasupathi and Carstensen (2003).
They studied the age diﬀerences in emotional experiences during mutual
reminiscence in adulthood, using an experience-sampling methodology.
As we have seen, they found that age was unrelated to the amount of
mutual reminiscing, but older people experienced more positive emotions
during mutual reminiscing than younger people. As no age diﬀerences
were found in the emotions of people who were engaged in other social
situations, this positivity eﬀect appears to result from reminiscence. A se-
cond study by Pasupathi and Carstensen showed that the positivity eﬀect
arises because older adults relived the positive quality of the initial event
more than younger people.
   The second theory is that of continuity theory (Atchley 1989, 1993), which
holds that experiencing continuity is essential to an individual’s mental
health and functioning. Atchley distinguished two ways of maintaining a
sense of continuity. External continuity refers to the preservation of one’s life
circumstances, whereas internal continuity concerns the preservation of one’s
own sense of identity. Both kinds are challenged when important life
events disrupt an individual’s life, as with the age-related life events of
retirement and the onset of frailty (Atchley 1993). To maintain a sense of
continuity, individuals ‘ attempt to preserve and maintain existing internal
and external structures and they prefer to accomplish this objective by
using strategies tied to their past experiences of themselves’ (Atchley 1989:
183). The resulting sense of continuity, with the aid of reminiscence, is
expected to promote adaptation. Continuity theory has been applied to
reminiscence most explicitly by Parker (1995, 1999). The theory assumes
that people reminisce more frequently during periods of personal tran-
sition than during stable periods. From her empirical research using self-
reports on the amount of reminiscing during transitional periods, Parker
found that young people were more likely to reminisce than older adults,
although older adults reported more positive emotions when reminiscing.
Studies of temporal comparisons have also found evidence of the import-
ance of continuity across the lifespan. Individuals who see stability in their
lives were found to have higher levels of wellbeing than those who see
change, even when this change is appraised as improvement (Keyes 2000;
Westerhof and Keyes 2006).
   Besides these theories which focus on emotional regulation and con-
tinuity, the lifespan theory of control has been applied to reminiscence (Schulz
and Heckhausen 1996). This theory holds that individuals strive through-
out the lifespan to maintain a sense of control over their lives. This can be
achieved through either primary or secondary control: ‘ primary control
targets the external world and attempts to achieve eﬀects in the immediate




http://journals.cambridge.org   Downloaded: 19 Mar 2015                        IP address: 138.251.14.35
   710     Gerben J. Westerhof et al.

   environment external to the individual, whereas secondary control targets the
   self and attempts to achieve changes directly within the individual ’ (1996 :
   708). In later life, individuals are expected to shift from primary to sec-
   ondary control strategies. Secondary control strategies may also involve a
   process of reminiscence.
      In its application to reminiscence, the theory has focused on a particular
   class of memories: regrets (Wrosch, Bauer and Scheier 2005 ; Wrosch and
   Heckhausen 2002). An important assumption in these studies is that, with
   advancing age the length of a person’s anticipated remaining life shortens,
   so it becomes more diﬃcult to modify regretted life paths. Wrosch and
   Heckhausen (2002) found that attributions of internal control were related
   to high-intensity regret among older adults, but associated with low-
   intensity regret among younger people. From a second study, Wrosch and
   colleagues (2005) showed that among older people who were disengaging
   from the goals associated with the regrets, having other future goals
   moderated the relation between the intensity of regret and quality of life.
   Both studies conﬁrmed that secondary control strategies dealing with life
   regrets are more important in old age than at younger ages. The ﬁndings
   of Timmer, Westerhof and Dittmann-Kohli’s (2005) study of German and
   Dutch people aged between 40 and 85 years also supported this idea that
   older people are more proﬁcient in using secondary control strategies
   when dealing with regrets. They found that they had fewer regrets and
   more often gave them external attributions than those of middle age.
      Although these three theories have diﬀerent perspectives, they all sub-
   scribe to the idea that reminiscence is important for the regulation of
   development across the lifespan. As theories of psychological processes,
   they also share the assumption that mental health is an important outcome
   of developmental regulation. Although there is no simple one-to-one
   match between lifespan processes and the various functions of remi-
   niscence, the mentioned correspondences shed light on the mental health
   outcomes of diﬀerent forms of reminiscence. We concluded in the pre-
   vious section that the social functions of conversation and teaching/
   informing are not strongly related to mental health, with the exception
   of an association with happiness. These functions of reminiscence corre-
   spond most closely to the processes described in socio-emotional selectivity
   theory, at least when they result in the recall of positive memories.
   Continuity and control theory both show more correspondence with the
   other uses of reminiscence: bitterness revival, boredom reduction, prob-
   lem solving, identity, death preparation, and intimacy maintenance. The
   three dysfunctional ways of reminiscing (bitterness revival, boredom re-
   duction, and intimacy maintenance) appear to be related to a feeling of
   continuity with the past that results in a negative evaluation of the present.




http://journals.cambridge.org   Downloaded: 19 Mar 2015          IP address: 138.251.14.35
                                              Reminiscence and mental health : a review     711

This demonstrates that in some cases, continuity, which people generally
prefer, may have negative corollaries.
   Control theory makes clear that in these cases, individuals have to be
willing to accept changes in the self using secondary control strategies. The
functions of identity, problem solving and death preparation have in
common that they deal not only with positive memories, but may activate
a secondary control strategy to ﬁnd meaning in past adversities. Through
a process of integration of the negative memories, or a process of recalling
how one coped with past problems, these are forms of reminiscence during
which memories are evaluated and elaborated. Reminiscence thus in-
volves balancing the maintenance of the structure of the self-system (con-
tinuity and primary control) with openness to change (secondary control;
see also Westerhof 2009). Compared to other descriptions of the life-review
process, this balancing is close to the process of working towards integration.
Coleman (1986) made clear that not all people engage in this process of life
review, but that it can be stimulated in interventions, a topic to which we
turn now.


Reminiscence interventions

Studies of reminiscence as a naturally occurring process have paved the
way for reminiscence as an intervention. We have seen that reminiscence
is voluntary and partly reconstructive, and that particular styles of remi-
niscence associate with mental health outcomes. Stimulating the positive
functions of reminiscence and discouraging the negative functions might
help improve mental health in later life. Butler (1974) was among the ﬁrst
to promote life review as an intervention for this purpose. In the ﬁrst wave
of reminiscence research that followed Butler’s work until around 1990,
interventions were developed in many settings and for many target groups,
including community residents (Fallot 1980; Fry 1983), nursing home resi-
dents (Haight 1988), and patients with dementia (Goldwasser, Auerbach
and Harkins 1987). Reviews of that research found limited evidence for the
eﬀectiveness of these reminiscence interventions (Kovach 1990; Molinari
and Reichlin 1984; Thornton and Brotchie 1987). Some researchers
realised that reminiscence is a more complex intervention than originally
thought (Kovach 1990; Webster 1994). The diversity and complexity of
reminiscence is still a major challenge, but also one of its main attractions
for both professionals and researchers (Gibson 2004).
   The use of reminiscence and life review in interventions and therapies
for older adults is very widespread nowadays, and there have been many
diﬀerent target groups, including: community residents, family members,




http://journals.cambridge.org   Downloaded: 19 Mar 2015                        IP address: 138.251.14.35
   712     Gerben J. Westerhof et al.

   voluntary aids, persons with chronic illness, persons with mental illness,
   rural-dwelling older adults, lesbian and gay older persons, war veterans,
   migrants, and ethnic minorities. The included activities have also been
   diverse, from autobiographical writing, storytelling, instructing younger
   generations about past events, oral history interviews, scrapbooks, artistic
   expressions, family genealogy, to blogging and other internet applications.
   Reminiscence programmes are used in neighbourhoods, higher edu-
   cation, primary schools, museums, theatres, churches, voluntary or-
   ganisations, assisted-living communities, nursing homes, dementia care,
   and mental health institutions. It is hard to compile ﬁgures on the use of
   reminiscence, because interventions have been given diﬀerent names, are
   used in disparate settings and are often part of other approaches. It is
   known, however, that about two-thirds of Dutch mental health institutions
   oﬀer life-review interventions.
       It has been argued that reminiscence interventions should make use of
   the research ﬁndings and scientiﬁc theories that link psychological pro-
   cesses in reminiscence to outcomes (Bluck and Levine 1998; Goldfried
   and Wolfe 1996), and that they should take account of the characteristics
   of the target group (e.g. the level of psychological distress and context), the
   goals of the intervention, the skills of the counsellors, and developmental
   theories (Lin, Dai and Hwang 2005). We propose that the recently devel-
   oped understanding of the various functions of reminiscence and their
   associations with mental health and lifespan processes provides a stronger
   evidence base and more appropriate theories with which to inform the
   design and delivery of interventions. Many scholars have distinguished
   simple reminiscence and life review (e.g. Fry 1983; Haight and Dias 1992 ;
   Webster and Young 1988), but recently a further distinction has been
   proposed between ‘ life review’ and ‘ life-review therapy ’ (Cappeliez 2002 ;
   Garland and Garland 2001). The principal diﬀerence between these two
   interventions is the amount of structure that is provided, which becomes
   clear when their purposes are considered. In interventions, simple remi-
   niscence corresponds most closely to the instigation of social reminiscence,
   life review to the promotion of positive functions, and life-review therapy
   to the discouragement of negative types of reminiscence. The next para-
   graphs are short descriptions of the three types of interventions, with a
   focus on the various target groups, goals and activities, and on the skills
   required of the counsellors.

   Three types of reminiscence interventions
   Simple reminiscence is appropriate for older adults in relatively good mental
   health and who ﬁnd sharing autobiographical memories a meaningful




http://journals.cambridge.org   Downloaded: 19 Mar 2015           IP address: 138.251.14.35
                                              Reminiscence and mental health : a review     713

activity. The main mental health goal of simple reminiscence is to enhance
positive feelings. A common application is reminiscence groups in nursing
homes, during which prompts for positive memories are given (see
Cook 1991) and a more recent application is found in groups fostering
intergenerational bonding (see Van Kordelaar et al. 2008). The central
activity is positive autobiographic storytelling that activates the social
functions of reminiscence. The staﬀ or counsellors need basic skills in
facilitating the process of spontaneous reminiscence and promoting social
interaction.
    Life review is most suited to people who are struggling to ﬁnd meaning in
life or have diﬃculties coping with transitions or adversity in their lives.
The goal of life review is to enhance aspects of mental health, such as self-
acceptance, mastery and meaning in life (Birren and Cochran 2001; Bluck
and Levine 1998; Wong 1995), by stimulating the reminiscence functions
of identity construction and problem solving (and possibly death prep-
aration). Individual life-review interviews (Haight 1988) and guided auto-
biography groups (Birren and Cochran 2001) are examples. The activities
are structured in the sense that they focus systematically on the entire
lifespan and promote the evaluation and integration of positive and
negative memories (Haight and Dias 1992; Webster and Young 1988). Life
review helps people gain insights into how they have developed through-
out their lives and have become the person they are now, which helps
them recognise and express what they have learnt from their positive and
negative experiences, and to recall the coping repertoire and values that
have guided them in their lives. The counsellors need advanced skills, as in
structuring the sessions and in framing the questions that link memories to
current life situations, and to help the participants reconceptualise the
meaning of past events.
    Life-review therapy is mostly used in therapeutic settings for older people
with serious mental health problems such as depression or anxiety. The
goals are to induce self-change and alleviate the symptoms of mental
illness. The focus is to reduce bitterness revival and boredom and to
stimulate the positive functions of reminiscence. This requires a more
dynamic intervention, because reminiscence by a mentally ill person
normally prompts life-stories that evoke bitterness or dissatisfaction with
his or her current self and life. Intervention protocols must be explicit
about the way in which these life-stories are directed towards a more
positive self-identity. One approach has been to link life review to theories
of autobiographic memory in depressed people, in particular to focus on
the speciﬁc positive memories which depressed individuals ﬁnd it diﬃcult
to enlist in everyday life (Serrano et al. 2004). Another approach has been
to link life review with other therapeutic frameworks, e.g. psycho-analytic




http://journals.cambridge.org   Downloaded: 19 Mar 2015                        IP address: 138.251.14.35
   714     Gerben J. Westerhof et al.

   therapy (Fry 1983), cognitive behavioural therapy (Cappeliez 2002 ; Watt
   and Cappeliez 2000), and narrative therapy (Bohlmeijer et al. 2008). When
   life review is linked with other therapeutic approaches, counsellors need
   specialist skills and the knowledge of the other therapies.

   The eﬀectiveness of reminiscence interventions
   An important question is how eﬀective are these diﬀerent types of inter-
   ventions in relation to their goals. Although reviews of the ﬁrst wave of
   reminiscence interventions found that the evidence base was still thin
   (Kovach 1990 ; Molinari and Reichlin 1984; Thornton and Brotchie 1987),
   the situation has improved in recent years. Recent reviews (Lin, Dai and
   Hwang 2005) and meta-analyses (Bohlmeijer et al. 2007; Bohlmeijer, Smit
   and Cuijpers 2003; Hsieh and Wang 2003) have shown that reminiscence
   interventions can be eﬀective in improving wellbeing and alleviating de-
   pression. The particular application in dementia care has also been found
   eﬀective in promoting wellbeing and mental health (Moos and Björn
   2006 ; Woods et al. 2005). All meta-analytic studies have concluded,
   however, that the eﬀects of interventions are heterogeneous : only some
   are eﬀective, which is not surprising given the diverse goals and target
   groups.
       The evidence base for the eﬀects of simple reminiscence is the thinnest :
   only a few studies have shown an eﬀect on mental health (Bohlmeijer,
   Smit and Cuijpers 2003; Bohlmeijer et al. 2007). Life review, however, does
   appear to have eﬀects for wellbeing (Arkoﬀ, Meredith and Dubanoski
   2004) and meaning in life (Westerhof, Bohlmeijer and Valenkamp 2005),
   but less on depression (e.g. Hanaoka and Okamura 2004; Haight, Michel
   and Hendrix 1998). Only life-review therapy is eﬀective in alleviating de-
   pression. On the basis of ﬁve recent studies (Arean et al. 1993 ; Goldwasser,
   Auerbach and Harkins 1987; Klausner et al. 1998; Serrano et al. 2004 ;
   Watt and Cappeliez 2000), Scogin et al. (2005) came to the conclusion that
   life-review therapy is an evidence-based intervention for depression in
   older adults, but diﬀerent formats were used in the reviewed studies and
   the samples were relatively small. The evidence base requires strength-
   ening through further independent trials.
       When the ﬁndings of eﬀect studies are related to the goals and methods
   of the diﬀerent reminiscence interventions, it becomes clear that not all
   interventions have the same eﬀects. Simple reminiscence is directed to-
   wards happiness, life review towards aspects of psychological wellbeing
   such as meaning in life and mastery, and only life-review therapy seeks to
   alleviate depression. The classiﬁcation into three types of reminiscence
   interventions with diﬀerent goals and methods emphasises that they do not




http://journals.cambridge.org   Downloaded: 19 Mar 2015         IP address: 138.251.14.35
                                              Reminiscence and mental health : a review     715

have identical eﬀects, and that their eﬀectiveness should be studied in
relation to their goals.


Discussion

Reviews of the early reminiscence research (Kovach 1990; Molinari and
Reichlin 1984 ; Thornton and Brotchie 1987; Webster 1994) concluded
that there is a need for more precise deﬁnitions and measurements, and
for better eﬀect studies of interventions. This paper has reviewed devel-
opments in theory, research and practical applications over the last two
decades, and found that the ﬁeld has come a long way in dealing with its
challenges. A better deﬁnition has been articulated and diﬀerent functions
of reminiscence have been empirically validated. There is increasing
understanding of how the functions of reminiscence relate to mental health
outcomes and to lifespan processes. The reminiscence interventions that
have been used in recent eﬀectiveness studies have had stronger theor-
etical and empirical foundations than seen before.
   We have proposed that in relation to their functions for promoting
mental health, there are three diﬀerent types of reminiscence: positive
reminiscence (identity construction, problem solving, and death preparation),
dysfunctional reminiscence (bitterness revival, boredom reduction, and in-
timacy maintenance), and social reminiscence (conversation and teaching
or informing). The diﬀerentiation is underpinned by theories of remi-
niscence, autobiographical memory, and lifespan development processes.
It could be validated in factor analytic studies as well as by the diﬀerential
relations of these three functions with mental health. Last, the threefold
classiﬁcation provides a way of classifying reminiscence interventions by
their diﬀerent uses of reminiscence functions.
   We also believe that the proposed classiﬁcation of reminiscence func-
tions in relation to mental health points to several constructive directions
for future research and practice development. First of all, studies of
reminiscence functions will proﬁt from a more person-centred approach.
Studies on the relationship between reminiscence functions and personal
characteristics such as gender, ethnicity, socio-economic status or per-
sonality are still few, and there are none on the best combinations of
reminiscence types for an individual person. For example, intimacy
maintenance might have a diﬀerent form when combined with boredom
reduction than when combined with identity construction.
   Second, we need longitudinal studies of reminiscence and mental
health. As we have seen, almost all published studies have been cross-
sectional, so we know little about change over time in an individual’s




http://journals.cambridge.org   Downloaded: 19 Mar 2015                        IP address: 138.251.14.35
   716     Gerben J. Westerhof et al.

   reminiscence functions. While the age diﬀerences found in cross-sectional
   studies suggest that the uses of reminiscence change over time, from more
   self-focused to more other-focused applications, this might be a cohort
   eﬀect related to spreading individualisation (Timmer, Westerhof and
   Dittmann-Kohli 2005). Longitudinal studies should also make clear under
   which conditions the uses of reminiscence might change. The lifespan
   theories discussed in this review have all made the assumption that remi-
   niscence intensiﬁes when individuals experience life transitions or a
   growing awareness of life’s ﬁnitude, but the literature on contextual in-
   ﬂuences on diﬀerent types of reminiscence is still sparse. Longitudinal
   studies will also provide more understanding of how diﬀerent types of
   reminiscence and mental health mutually inﬂuence each other. Address-
   ing these questions will improve our understanding of reminiscence and its
   uses across the lifespan, and more empirical evidence will further inform
   psychological practice. Clearly, more studies (particularly replications of
   earlier studies and controlled trials with large samples) are needed to test
   the eﬀectiveness and eﬃcacy of interventions. The threefold classiﬁcation
   of diﬀerent types of reminiscence intervention can be used to guide the
   development of reminiscence interventions as well as evaluations of their
   eﬀectiveness.
      Interventions would proﬁt further if studies of reminiscence interven-
   tions included measures of their use and outcomes. First, evidence about
   whether or not an intervention changed the reminiscence functions would
   be of interest. Second, it should be more widely understood that people
   disposed to a particular use of reminiscence proﬁt to a greater or lesser
   extent from diﬀerent interventions, and all practitioners should know
   that interventions can have negative side-eﬀects, such as increased worry
   or rumination for persons with a negative type of reminiscence. Third,
   studies of the actual use of reminiscence by the participants during inter-
   ventions would provide further information on the processes which lead to
   changes in mental health. To conclude, although there has been much
   progress in the last two decades, much challenging and important research
   is still required in this intriguing ﬁeld of study.


   References
   Arean, P. A., Perri, M. G., Nezu, A. M. and Schein, R. L. 1993. Comparative eﬀectiveness
     of social problem-solving therapy and reminiscence therapy as treatment for depression
     in older adults. Journal of Consulting and Clinical Psychology, 61, 6, 1003–10.
   Arkoﬀ, A., Meredith, G. M. and Dubanoski, J. P. 2004. Gains in well-being achieved
     through retrospective proactive life review by independent older women. Journal of
     Humanistic Psychology, 44, 2, 204–14.




http://journals.cambridge.org   Downloaded: 19 Mar 2015                  IP address: 138.251.14.35
                                              Reminiscence and mental health : a review        717
Atchley, R. C. 1989. A continuity theory of normal aging. The Gerontologist, 29, 2, 183–90.
Atchley, R. C. 1993. Continuity theory and the evolution of activity in later adulthood.
  In Kelly, J. R. (ed.), Activity and Aging : Staying Involved in Later Life. Sage, Newbury Park,
  California, 5–16.
Beck, A. T., Steer, R. A. and Brown, G. K. 1996. Beck Depression Inventory : Second Edition
  Manual. Psychological Corporation, San Antonio, Texas.
Birren, J. E. and Cochran, K. N. 2001. Telling the Stories of Life Through Guided Autobiography
  Groups. Johns Hopkins University Press, Baltimore, Maryland.
Bluck, S. and Alea, N. 2002. Exploring the functions of autobiographical memory : why do
  I remember the autumn? In Webster, J. D. and Haight, B. K. (eds), Critical Advances in
  Reminiscence Work : From Theory to Application. Springer, New York, 61–75.
Bluck, S., Alea, N., Habermas, T. and Rubin, D. C. 2005. A tale of three functions : the
  self-reported uses of autobiographical memory. Social Cognition, 23, 1, 91–117.
Bluck, S. and Levine, L. J. 1998. Reminiscence as autobiographical memory: a catalyst for
  reminiscence theory development. Ageing & Society, 18, 2, 185–208.
Bohlmeijer, E. T., Roemer, M., Cuijpers, P. and Smit, F. 2007. The eﬀects of life-review on
  psychological well-being in older adults : a meta-analysis. Aging and Mental Health, 11, 3,
  291–300.
Bohlmeijer, E., Smit, F. and Cuijpers, P. 2003. Eﬀects of reminiscence and life review on
  late-life depression : a meta-analysis. International Journal of Geriatric Psychiatry, 18, 12,
  1088–94.
Bohlmeijer, E., Westerhof, G. J. and Emmerik-de Jong, M. 2008. The eﬀects of a new
  narrative life-review intervention for improving meaning in life in older adults : results of
  a pilot project. Aging and Mental Health, 12, 5, 639–46.
Butler, R. N. 1963. The life-review : an interpretation of reminiscence in the aged.
  Psychiatry, 26, 1, 65–76.
Butler, R. N. 1974. Successful aging and the role of the life review. Journal of the American
  Geriatrics Society, 22, 12, 529–35.
Cappeliez, P. 2002. Cognitive-reminiscence therapy for depressed older adults in day
  hospital and long-term care. In Webster, J. D. and Haight, B. K. (eds), Critical Advances in
  Reminiscence Work : From Theory to Application. Springer, New York, 300–13.
Cappeliez, P. and O’Rourke, N. 2002. Personality traits and existential concerns as pre-
  dictors of the functions of reminiscence in older adults. Journal of Gerontology : Psychological
  Sciences, 57, 2, 116–23.
Cappeliez, P. and O’Rourke, N. 2006. Empirical validation of a model of reminiscence
  and health in later life. Journal of Gerontology : Psychological Sciences, 61, 4, 237–44.
Cappeliez, P., O’Rourke, N. and Chaudhury, H. 2005. Functions of reminiscence and
  mental health in later life. Aging and Mental Health, 9, 4, 295–301.
Cappeliez, P., Rivard, V. and Guindon, S. 2007. Functions of reminiscence in later
  life : proposition of a model and applications. European Review of Applied Psychology, 57, 3,
  151–6.
Carstensen, L. L. 1995. Evidence for a life-span theory of socioemotional selectivity. Current
  Directions in Psychological Science, 4, 5, 151–6.
Carstensen, L. L. 2006. The inﬂuence of a sense of time on human development. Science,
  312, 5782, 1913–5.
Coleman, P. G. 1974. Measuring reminiscence characteristics from conversation as
  adaptive features of old age. International Journal of Aging and Human Development, 5, 3,
  281–94.
Coleman, P. G. 1986. Ageing and Reminiscence Processes : Social and Clinical Implications. Wiley,
  Chichester, UK.
Conway, M. A., Singer, J. A. and Tagini, A. 2004. The self and autobiographical memory :
  correspondence and coherence. Social Cognition, 22, 5, 491–529.




http://journals.cambridge.org   Downloaded: 19 Mar 2015                           IP address: 138.251.14.35
   718     Gerben J. Westerhof et al.
   Cook, E. A. 1991. The eﬀects of reminiscence on psychological measures of ego integrity in
      elderly nursing home residents. Archives of Psychiatric Nursing, 5, 5, 292–8.
   Cully, J. A., LaVoie, D. and Gfeller, J. D. 2001. Reminiscence, personality, and psycho-
      logical functioning in older adults. The Gerontologist, 41, 1, 89–95.
   Diener, E., Emmons, R. A., Larsen, R. J. and Griﬃn, S. 1985. The satisfaction with life
      scale. Journal of Personality Assessment, 49, 1, 71–5.
   Erikson, E. 1959. Identity and the Life Cycle. International University Press, New York.
   Fallot, R. D. 1980. The impact on mood of verbal reminiscing in later adulthood.
      International Journal of Aging and Human Development, 10, 4, 385–400.
   Fitzgerald, J. M. 1996. Intersecting meanings of reminiscence in adult development
      and aging. In Rubin, D. C. (ed.), Remembering Our Past: Studies in Autobiographical Memory.
      Cambridge University Press, New York, 360–83.
   Fry, P. S. 1983. Structured and unstructured reminiscence training and depression among
      the elderly. Clinical Gerontologist, 1, 3, 15–37.
   Garland, J. and Garland, C. 2001. Life Review in Health and Social Care : A Practitioner’s Guide.
      Brunner-Routledge, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania.
   Garland, J. and Garland, C. 2004. Life Review in Health and Social Care : A Practitioner’s Guide.
      Brunner-Routledge, Hove, UK.
   Gibson, F. M. A. 2004. The Past in the Present : Using Reminiscence in Health and Social Care.
      Health Professions Press, London.
   Goldberg, D. 1978. Manual for the General Health Questionnaire. Oxford University Press,
      Oxford.
   Goldfried, M. R. and Wolfe, B. E. 1996. Psychotherapy practice and research : repairing a
      strained relationship. American Psychologist, 51, 10, 1007–16.
   Goldwasser, A. N., Auerbach, S. M. and Harkins, S. W. 1987. Cognitive, aﬀective, and
      behavioral eﬀects of reminiscence group therapy on demented elderly. International
      Journal of Aging and Human Development, 25, 3, 209–22.
   Habegger, C. E. and Blieszner, R. 1990. Personal and social aspects of reminiscence:
      an exploratory study of neglected dimensions. Activities, Adaptation and Aging, 14, 4, 21–38.
   Haight, B. K. 1988. The therapeutic role of a structured life review process in homebound
      elderly subjects. Journal of Gerontology : Psychological Sciences, 43, 2, 40–4.
   Haight, B. K. 1991. Reminiscing : the state of the art as a basis for practice. International
      Journal of Aging and Human Development, 33, 1, 1–32.
   Haight, B. K. and Dias, J. K. 1992. Examining key variables in selected reminiscing
      modalities. International Psychogeriatrics, 4, supplement 2, 279–90.
   Haight, B. K., Michel, Y. and Hendrix, S. 1998. Life review : preventing despair in newly
      relocated nursing home residents : short- and long-term eﬀects. International Journal of
      Aging and Human Development, 47, 2, 119–42.
   Hanaoka, H. and Okamura, H. 2004. Study on eﬀects of life review activities on the quality
      of life of the elderly : a randomized controlled trial. Psychotherapy and Psychosomatics, 73, 5,
      302–11.
   Havighurst, R. J. and Glasser, R. 1972. An exploratory study of reminiscence. Journal of
      Gerontology, 27, 2, 245–53.
   Hsieh, H. F. and Wang, J. J. 2003. Eﬀect of reminiscence therapy on depression in older
      adults : a systematic review. International Journal of Nursing Studies, 40, 4, 335–45.
   Hyland, D. T. and Ackerman, A. M. 1988. Reminiscence and autobiographical memory
      in the study of the personal past. Journal of Gerontology : Psychological Sciences, 43, 2, 35–9.
   Keyes, C. L. M. 2000. Subjective change and its consequences for emotional well-being.
      Motivation and Emotion, 24, 2, 67–84.
   Klausner, E. J., Clarkin, J. F., Spielman, L., Pupo, C., Abrams, R. and Alexopoulos, G. S.
      1998. Late-life depression and functional disability : the role of goal-focused group
      psychotherapy. International Journal of Geriatric Psychiatry, 13, 10, 707–16.




http://journals.cambridge.org   Downloaded: 19 Mar 2015                           IP address: 138.251.14.35
                                               Reminiscence and mental health : a review        719
Kovach, C. R. 1990. Promise and problems in reminiscence research. Journal of
  Gerontological Nursing, 16, 4, 10–4.
Kovach, C. R. 1995. A qualitative look at reminiscing : using the autobiographical memory
  coding tool. In Haight, B. K. and Webster, J. D. (eds), The Art and Science of Reminiscing :
  Theory, Research, Methods and Applications. Taylor and Francis, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania,
  103–22.
Kozma, A., Stones M. J. and McNeil, J. K. 1990. Psychological Well-Being in Later Life.
  Butterworths, Toronto.
Lin, Y. C., Dai, Y. T. and Hwang, S. L. 2005. The eﬀect of reminiscence on the elderly
  population : a systematic review. Public Health Nursing, 20, 4, 297–306.
Lo Gerfo, M. 1980. Three ways of reminiscence in theory and practice. International Journal
  of Aging and Human Development, 12, 1, 39–48.
Marsh, E. J. 2007. Retelling is not the same as recalling : implications for memory. Current
  Directions in Psychological Science, 16, 1, 16–20.
McMahon, A. W. and Rhudick, P. J. 1964. Reminiscing, adaptational signiﬁcance in the
  aged. Archives of General Psychiatry, 10, 3, 292–98.
McMordie, W. R. 1979. Improving measurement of death anxiety. Psychological Reports, 44,
  3, 975–80.
Merriam, S. B. 1993. Butler’s life review : how universal is it ? International Journal of Aging and
  Human Development, 37, 3, 163–75.
Merriam, S. B. and Cross, L. H. 1982. Adulthood and reminiscence : a descriptive study.
  Educational Gerontology, 8, 3, 275–90.
Molinari, V. and Reichlin, R. E. 1984. Life review reminiscence in the elderly : a review of
  the literature. International Journal of Aging and Human Development, 20, 2, 81–92.
Moos, I. and Björn, A. 2006. Use of the life story in the institutional care of people with
  dementia : a review of intervention studies. Ageing & Society, 26, 3, 431–54.
Parker, R. G. 1995. Reminiscence: a community theory framework. The Gerontologist, 35, 4,
  515–25.
Parker, R. G. 1999. Reminiscence as continuity : comparison of young and older adults.
  Journal of Clinical Geropsychology, 5, 2, 147–57.
Pasupathi, M. 2001. The social construction of the personal past and its implications for
  adult development. Psychological Bulletin, 127, 5, 651–72.
Pasupathi, M. and Carstensen, L. L. 2003. Age and emotional experience during mutual
  reminiscing. Psychology and Aging, 18, 3, 430–42.
Pasupathi, M., Weeks, T. and Rice, C. 2006. Reﬂecting on life : remembering as a major
  process in adult development. Journal of Language and Social Psychology, 25, 3, 244–63.
Reker, G. T. 1992. Life Attitude Proﬁle—Revised. Student Psychologists Press, Peterborough,
  Ontario, Canada.
Rybash, J. M. and Hrubi, K. L. 1997. Psychometric and psychodynamic correlates of ﬁrst
  memories in younger and older adults. The Gerontologist, 37, 5, 581–7.
Santor, D. and Zuroﬀ, D. C. 1994. Depressive symptoms : eﬀects of negative aﬀectivity and
  failing to accept the past. Journal of Personality Assessment, 63, 2, 294–312.
Schulz, R. and Heckhausen, J. 1996. A life span model of successful aging. American
  Psychologist, 51, 7, 702–14.
Scogin, F., Welsh, D., Hanson, A., Stump, J. and Coates, A. 2005. Evidence-based
  psychotherapies for depression in older adults. Clinical Psychology : Science and Practice, 12,
  3, 222–37.
Serrano, J. P., Latorre, J. M., Gatz, M. and Montanes, J. 2004. Life-review therapy using
  autobiographical retrieval practice for older adults with depressive symptomatology.
  Psychology and Aging, 19, 2, 272–7.
Spielberger, C. D., Gorsuch, R. L. and Lushene, R. E. 1970. Manual for the State-Trait Anxiety
  Inventory. Consulting Psychologists Press, Palo Alto, California.




http://journals.cambridge.org    Downloaded: 19 Mar 2015                           IP address: 138.251.14.35
   720     Gerben J. Westerhof et al.
   Thorne, A. 2000. Personal memory telling and personality development. Personality and
     Social Psychology Review, 4, 1, 46–56.
   Thornton, S. and Brotchie, J. 1987. Reminiscence: a critical review of the empirical
     literature. British Journal of Clinical Psychology, 26, 2, 93–111.
   Timmer, E., Westerhof, G. J. and Dittmann-Kohli, F. 2005. ‘ When looking back on my
     past life I regret... ’: retrospective regret in the second half of life. Death Studies, 29, 7,
     625–44.
   Van Kordelaar, K., Vlak, A., Kuin, Y. and Westerhof, G. J. 2008. Groen en Grijs : Jong en Oud
     met Elkaar in Gesprek [Green and Grey : Conversations Between Younger and Older Adults]. Bohn
     Staﬂeu Van Loghum, Houten, The Netherlands.
   Watt, L. M. and Cappeliez, P. 2000. Integrative and instrumental reminiscence therapies
     for depression in older adults : intervention strategies and treatment eﬀectiveness. Aging
     and Mental Health, 4, 2, 166–77.
   Webster, J. D. 1993. Construction and validation of the Reminiscence Functions Scale.
     Journal of Gerontology, 48, 5, 256–62.
   Webster, J. D. 1994. Predictors of reminiscence: a lifespan perspective. Canadian Journal on
     Aging, 13, 1, 66–78.
   Webster, J. D. 1995. Adult age diﬀerences in reminiscence functions. In Haight, B. K.
     and Webster, J. D. (eds), The Art and Science of Reminiscing : Theory, Research, Methods, and
     Applications. Taylor and Francis, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania, 89–102.
   Webster, J. D. 1997. The reminiscence function scale : a replication. International Journal of
     Aging and Human Development, 44, 2, 137–48.
   Webster, J. D. 1998. Attachment styles, reminiscence function, and happiness in young and
     elderly adults. Journal of Aging Studies, 12, 3, 315–30.
   Webster, J. D. 2002. Reminiscence functions in adulthood : age, race and family dynamics
     correlates. In Webster, J. D. and Haight, B. K. (eds), Critical Advances in Reminiscence Work :
     From Theory to Application. Springer, New York, 140–52.
   Webster, J. D. 2003. The reminiscence circumplex and autobiographical functions.
     Memory, 11, 2, 203–15.
   Webster, J. D. and Gould, O. 2007. Reminiscence and vivid personal memories across
     adulthood. International Journal of Aging and Human Development, 64, 2, 149–70.
   Webster, J. D. and Haight, B. K. 1995. Memory lane milestones : progress in reminiscence
     deﬁnition and classiﬁcation. In Haight, B. K. and Webster, J. D. (eds), The Art and Science
     of Reminiscing : Theory, Research, Methods, and Applications. Taylor and Francis, Philadelphia,
     Pennsylvania, 273–86.
   Webster, J. D. and McCall, M. E. 1999. Reminiscence functions across adulthood :
     a replication and extension. Journal of Adult Development, 6, 1, 73–85.
   Webster, J. D. and Young, R. A. 1988. Process variables of the life review : counseling
     implications. International Journal of Aging and Human Development, 26, 4, 315–23.
   Westerhof, G. J. 2009. Identity construction in the third age : the role of self-narratives.
     In Hartung, H. and Maierhofer, R. (eds), Narratives of Lives : Mediating Age. LIT Verlag,
     Münster, Germany.
   Westerhof, G. J., Bohlmeijer, E. and Valenkamp, M. W. 2005. In search of meaning: a
     reminiscence program for older persons. Educational Gerontology, 30, 9, 751–66.
   Westerhof, G. J. and Keyes, C. L. M. 2006. After the fall of the Berlin Wall : perceptions
     and consequences of stability and change among middle aged and older East- and
     West-Germans. Journal of Gerontology : Social Sciences, 61B, 5, 240–7.
   Whitbourne, S. K. 1985. The psychological construction of the life-span. In Birren, J. E.
     and Schaie, K. W. (eds), Handbook of the Psychology of Aging. Van Nostrand Reinhold,
     New York, 594–618.
   Wilson, A. E. and Ross, M. 2003. The identity function of autobiographical memory : time
     is on our side. Memory, 11, 2, 137–49.




http://journals.cambridge.org   Downloaded: 19 Mar 2015                         IP address: 138.251.14.35
                                              Reminiscence and mental health : a review      721
Wink, P. and Schiﬀ, B. 2002. To review or not to review ? The role of personality and life
 events in life review and adaptation to older age. In Webster, J. D. and Haight, B. K.
 (eds), Critical Advances in Reminiscence Work : From Theory to Application. Springer, New York,
 44–60.
Wong, P. T. 1995. The processes of adaptive reminiscence. In Haight, B. K. and Webster,
 J. D. (eds), The Art and Science of Reminiscing : Theory, Research, Methods, and Applications.
 Taylor and Francis, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania, 23–35.
Wong, P. T. and Watt, L. M. 1991. What types of reminiscence are associated with
 successful aging ? Psychology and Aging, 6, 2, 272–9.
Woods, B., Spector, A., Jones, C., Orrell, M. and Davies, S. 2005. Reminiscence therapy
 for dementia. Cochrane Database of Systematic Reviews, 18, 2, CD001120.
Wrosch, C., Bauer, I. and Scheier, M. F. 2005. Regret and quality of life across the adult
 life span : the inﬂuence of disengagement and available future goals. Psychology and Aging,
 20, 4, 657–70.
Wrosch, C. and Heckhausen, J. 2002. Perceived control of life regrets : good for young and
 bad for old adults. Psychology and Aging, 17, 2, 340–50.

                          Accepted 2 July 2009; ﬁrst published online 1 March 2010
Address for correspondence:
Gerben J. Westerhof, Psychology and Communication of Health
and Risk, University of Twente, POBox 217, 7500AE Enschede,
The Netherlands.

E-mail: g.j.westerhof@utwente.nl




http://journals.cambridge.org   Downloaded: 19 Mar 2015                         IP address: 138.251.14.35
