                         Personality and Individual Diﬀerences 43 (2007) 1303–1305
                                                                                      www.elsevier.com/locate/paid


                                          Short Communication

The sensation seeking scale V (SSS-V): Still reliable and valid
                                             Marvin Zuckerman
                    Department of Psychology, University of Delaware, Newark, DE 19716, USA

                                              Received 13 March 2007
                                            Available online 17 May 2007




Abstract

   This is a response to Gray and Wilson’s (2007) article: ‘‘A detailed analysis of the reliability and validity
of the sensation seeking scale in a UK sample’’. Gray and Wilson analysed the items in the four subscales of
the SSS-V, using a Likert type response format and deconstructing the forced choice format of the original.
However they used some anachronistic items from the old 1978 form rather than the revisions of these items
in the newer form. But even excluding the 19 items from the 80 item test not meeting their internal reliability
criterion did not improve the reliabilities of the old scales in their Likert format. Validity of the SSS is not
really addressed despite the title of the article.
Ó 2007 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

Keywords: Sensation seeking scale; Reliability; Validity; Test construction




1. Main text

  Some old tests, like their authors, ‘‘just fade away’’. Fortunately this has not proven to be true
for the SSS-V which dates from Zuckerman, Eysenck, and Eysenck (1978). The SSS-V was a
shortened version of the older SSS-IV (Zuckerman, 1971) whose items were written in the late
1960’s and early 1970’s. The forced choice form was used to control the inﬂuence of social desir-
ability. In the mode of behavioral assessment, popular at that time, items tended to reﬂect behav-



   E-mail address: zuckerma@udel.edu

0191-8869/$ - see front matter Ó 2007 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.
doi:10.1016/j.paid.2007.03.021
1304              M. Zuckerman / Personality and Individual Diﬀerences 43 (2007) 1303–1305

ioral experience, intentions, and desires as well as attitudes consistent with the concept of sensa-
tion seeking.
   Unfortunately, some of the item content was worded in the vernacular or slang of the time. This
is a mistake test constructors should be warned about because if the test survives beyond a gen-
eration the vernacular of an older generation may become incomprehensible to the following gen-
erations. Sometime in the 1980’s we became aware of the datedness of some of the items and
changed the wordings or explained what terms meant in the item itself. One problem with the
Gray and Wilson study is that they seem to have used an older version of the SSS preceding
the wording changes. Perhaps they used the copy in the appendix of the ﬁrst book on sensation
seeking (Zuckerman, 1979) instead of the one in the appendix of the second book on sensation
seeking (Zuckerman, 1994).
   The fact that they used the older version is apparent in the items cited, for instance ‘‘I stay away
from anyone I suspect of being queer’’, this item choice was based on the idea that homophobia is
a characteristic of low sensation seekers’ fear of the unfamiliar, particularly in the area of sexu-
ality. The word ‘‘queer’’ was not meant to be pejorative although it is now regarded as oﬀensive,
at least as used by those who are not themselves homosexual. In the revised version (Zuckerman,
1994) the item reads: ‘‘I stay away from anyone I suspect of being ‘gay’ or ‘lesbian’’’. The term
‘‘swingers’’ is deﬁned in the revised item as ‘‘...people who are uninhibited and free about sex’’.
Four items relating to these two (both choices of the forced choice version) were deleted from
their revised Likert format of the SSS.
   The title of their article mentions both the reliability and validity of the sensation seeking scale,
but their study concerns only the reliability or internal consistency of the four subscales. Both the
reliability and validity of the SSS-V can be found in the many hundreds of studies done on the test
over the years (Zuckerman, 1979, 1994, 2007). The discriminant validity of the subscales is shown
by the ﬁndings that they relate diﬀerentially to various criteria like musical and art preferences
and biological factors like augmenting of the evoked potential. The factor structure of the test
has been replicated in many studies even those done on translated versions of the test. But is their
study a credible test of the reliability and does it challenge the reliability of the older version?
   They adapted the forced choice form to a Likert form so that the 40 item test was deconstructed
to 80 Likert type items. The number of subjects (142 British undergraduates) does not seem to be
adequate for an analysis based on the intercorrelations of 80 items. Did their deletion of the 19
items which did not cluster most highly with the other items in their respective subscales actually
improve the reliabilities in the Likert format? The alpha of the Thrill and Adventure Seeking sub-
scale (0.91) was already so high that it could not be improved by the deletion of items. The alpha
of the Experience Seeking subscale went from 0.79 to 0.80. The alpha of the Disinhibition subscale
soared from 0.83 to 0.84. The Boredom Susceptibility alpha changed from 0.72 to 0.74. In sum,
deleting the 19 deﬁcient items had practically no eﬀect on the reliabilities of the four subscales.
   The real problem with the SSS-V that became more apparent over the years was not the reli-
ability of the factors but the confounding of some of the item content with the dependent variables
in some studies. A few items concerning drinking and the desire to try drugs were a potential con-
found in studies of actual use or abuse of substances. Questions about desires to engage in speciﬁc
risky sports were a confound in studies of those actually engaging in those sports. Some investi-
gators tried to eliminate the confounding by eliminating those items or scales from the test. The
validity in predicting engagement in risky sex, drugs, or sports was generally unaﬀected by such
                     M. Zuckerman / Personality and Individual Diﬀerences 43 (2007) 1303–1305                          1305

revisions (Zuckerman, 2007), but when we devised a new scale for ‘‘Impulsive Sensation Seeking’’
as part of a broader 5-factor personality test (Zuckerman–Kuhlman Personality Questionnaire)
we decided to remove all references to speciﬁc activities in the items (Zuckerman, 2002; Zucker-
man, Kuhlman, Joireman, Teta, & Kraft, 1993). Unlike the SSS-V the ImpSS has only two facets,
impulsivity and sensation seeking. Like the other items of the ZKPQ it is in true-false response
format. Gray and Wilson (2007) do not mention this scale in their review.
   In sum, their study did not take account of the revised SSS-V and used items from an older
form no longer in use. Even so, the deletion of items did not change the reliabilities of the four
old subscales of the SSS-V and, despite its title, the study did not really address the well-demon-
strated validity of the SSS-V or its subscales in terms of their relationships to theory and external
criteria.


References

Gray, J. M., & Wilson, M. A. (2007). A detailed analysis of the reliability and validity of the sensation seeking scale in a
  UK sample. Personality and Individual Diﬀerences, 42, 641–651.
Zuckerman, M. (1971). Dimensions of sensation seeking. Journal of Consulting and Clinical Psychology, 36, 45–52.
Zuckerman, M. (1979). Sensation seeking: Beyond the optimal level of arousal. Hillsdale, NJ: Erlbaum.
Zuckerman, M. (1994). Behavioral expressions and biosocial bases of sensation seeking. New York: Cambridge
  University Press.
Zuckerman, M. (2002). Zuckerman–Kuhlman personality questionnaire (ZKPQ): an alternative ﬁve-factorial model. In
  M. Perugini & B. DeRaad (Eds.), Big ﬁve assessment (pp. 377–396). Seattle, WA: Hogrefe and Huber Publishers.
Zuckerman, M. (2007). Sensation seeking and risky behavior. Washington, DC: American Psychological Association.
Zuckerman, M., Eysenck, S. B. G., & Eysenck, H. J. (1978). Sensation seeking in Europe and America: cross-cultural,
  age, and sex comparisons. Journal of Consulting and Clinical Psychology, 46, 139–149.
Zuckerman, M., Kuhlman, D. M., Joireman, J., Teta, P., & Kraft, M. (1993). A comparison of three structural models
  for personality: the big three, the big ﬁve, and the alternative ﬁve. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 65,
  757–768.
