Accepted Manuscript

Full Length Article

Evaluating the Predictive Validity of Personality Trait Judgments Using a Nat-
uralistic Behavioral Criterion: A Preliminary Test of the Self-Other Knowledge
Asymmetry Model

Andrew Beer, Simine Vazire

PII:                    S0092-6566(17)30067-3
DOI:                    http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.jrp.2017.06.004
Reference:              YJRPE 3650

To appear in:           Journal of Research in Personality

Received Date:          10 August 2016
Revised Date:           20 June 2017
Accepted Date:          21 June 2017


Please cite this article as: Beer, A., Vazire, S., Evaluating the Predictive Validity of Personality Trait Judgments
Using a Naturalistic Behavioral Criterion: A Preliminary Test of the Self-Other Knowledge Asymmetry Model,
Journal of Research in Personality (2017), doi: http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.jrp.2017.06.004



This is a PDF file of an unedited manuscript that has been accepted for publication. As a service to our customers
we are providing this early version of the manuscript. The manuscript will undergo copyediting, typesetting, and
review of the resulting proof before it is published in its final form. Please note that during the production process
errors may be discovered which could affect the content, and all legal disclaimers that apply to the journal pertain.
                                                                      Validity by Source 1




 Evaluating the Predictive Validity of Personality Trait Judgments Using a Naturalistic
Behavioral Criterion: A Preliminary Test of the Self-Other Knowledge Asymmetry Model




                                     Andrew Beer

                         University of South Carolina Upstate



                                    Simine Vazire

                            University of California Davis
                                                                      Validity by Source 2




 Evaluating the Predictive Validity of Personality Trait Judgments Using a Naturalistic
Behavioral Criterion: A Preliminary Test of the Self-Other Knowledge Asymmetry Model
                                                                              Validity by Source 3

                                             Abstract

We tracked 87 participants over two days using the Electronically Activated Recorder (EAR).

Coded variables included expressions of mood, amount of talking in various situations (e.g., with

one other person, with a friend, etc.), locations, and behavioral markers of the Big Five.

Collection of self-, informant-, and stranger-ratings on markers of the Big Five allowed for a

unique test of the Self-Other Knowledge Asymmetry (SOKA) model. Although effect sizes

were modest, there was evidence for the validity of both self- and informant-ratings across most

trait dimensions. Stranger ratings showed evidence of validity in the domain of Extraversion.

Predictions derived from the SOKA model were partially supported, though more research with

larger samples is needed to provide stronger tests of SOKA.




Keywords: personality, naturalistic observation, validity, self-knowledge, zero acquaintance,

informant ratings
                                                                                Validity by Source 4


     Evaluating the Predictive Validity of Personality Trait Judgments Using a Naturalistic

   Behavioral Criterion: A Preliminary Test of the Self-Other Knowledge Asymmetry Model


       Personality traits are invisible--putative latent constructs that drive consistent individual

differences in thought, feeling, and behavior. Thus, from a purely objective standpoint, they

must generally be inferred rather than directly observed. Despite this theoretical thorniness,

attempts to systematically catalog and effectively assess broad dimensions of individual

differences have spanned 80 years—much of the time that psychology, as a formal discipline,

has existed. The most common method of personality trait assessment has been self-report

(Vazire, 2006), founded on the beliefs that individuals (a) have near complete access to their own

behavior, and (b) have unique access to their mental states, including their motivations,

intentions, and internal emotional states. Indeed, these advantages frequently produce

circumstances under which self-report measures of personality traits predict meaningful life

outcomes (Ozer & Benet-Martinez, 2006) and everyday behaviors (Mehl, Gosling, &

Pennebaker, 2006).


       However, the use of self-reports as a primary source of information about personality

certainly leaves some things to be desired (for an extensive review of concerns with self-

assessments of various sorts, see Dunning, Heath, & Suls, 2004; for a review of self-reports of

personality in particular, see Back & Vazire, 2012; Paulhus & Vazire, 2007). Although

individuals have access to most of their behavior, some more automatic or unconscious aspects

of behavior may go unnoticed by the actor but be quite impactful on his or her environment and

thus an important aspect of one’s personality. For example, evading eye contact in personal

interactions is an act about which the actor could easily be unaware but may influence interaction

partners quite a bit. Moreover, when forming impressions of one’s own behavior, people may be
                                                                               Validity by Source 5


overly sensitive to the thoughts and feelings they were having, and place too little emphasis on

their overt actions (Andersen, 1984). Indeed, much has been written about limitations of the

actor’s perspective for observing his/her own behavior (Jones & Nisbett, 1971; Malle, 2006;

Robins, Spranca, & Mendelson, 1996; Watson, 1982).


        People may also have biases that distort the accuracy of their self-views, even when they

have perfect access to the information they would need to form accurate self-views. There is

now a fairly large body of evidence suggesting that self-enhancement is quite common (Alicke,

1985; Kwan et al., 2007; Taylor & Brown, 1988), but that there are also important individual

differences in self-bias (Paulhus, 1984; Paulhus & John, 1998). Importantly, the fact that people

do not all share the same direction and level of bias about themselves is even more problematic

for the accuracy of self-perceptions (Vazire, 2010). If everyone self-enhanced, and did so to

more or less the same degree, this would inflate the absolute level of people’s self-ratings, but

the between-person rank-order accuracy of self-ratings would be intact. Instead, the fact that

some people self-enhance, others self-deprecate, and still others are relatively unbiased (Bollich,

Rogers, & Vazire, 2015), means that the between-person rank-ordering of people’s self-views no

longer matches up with the rank-ordering of their actual standing on a trait. Additionally, there

are some circumstances in which individuals may have perfectly accurate self-views but may be

motivated to willfully and knowingly misrepresent themselves if they believe something may be

gained by doing so (e.g., assessments by current or prospective employers, dating website

profiles, etc.).


        For these and other reasons, psychologists will frequently turn to others for personality

information regarding a given target individual. The rationale is that knowledgeable informants

(e.g., friends, spouses, co-workers, roommates, etc.) have access to a wide variety of behaviors
                                                                                Validity by Source 6


over time and across situations. Moreover, while close others certainly generate biased

personality perceptions their biases tend to be more uniformly positive than self-biases and thus

less disruptive of the between-person rank ordering on a given trait (Leising, Erbs, & Fritz, 2010;

Leising, Gallrein, & Dufner, 2014). Indeed, informant judgments of personality do predict

behavior (Connelly & Ones, 2010; Hofstee, 1994; Kolar, Funder & Colvin, 1996). However,

informants are not without their blind spots either. For example, Vazire (2010) found that

friends’ ratings of personality were less predictive of behavior than self-ratings for traits low in

observability (e.g., neuroticism).


       Since it appears that personality ratings made by the self or knowledgeable informants

cannot be taken as completely valid on their own, the general temptation has been to simply

aggregate across sources of data to achieve the most valid estimate of an individual’s standing on

a given trait domain (see Letzring, Wells, & Funder, 2006, for an extensive discussion). This

logic is generally sound, and in a perfect world, we would simply collect massive amounts of

data from multiple sources. However, this is a laborious process for those interested in

practically applying the research findings, and in terms of theory, it seems clear that aggregation

only buys predictive validity in some circumstances—in others, one source or another predicts a

relevant outcome just as well on its own (Vazire & Mehl, 2008). In addition, to the extent that

some of the variation across judges is non-random (e.g., a positive evaluative bias), these errors

would be compounded or sustained—not eliminated—in an aggregate.


       Considerations such as these require a more careful analysis of sources of personality

data. Recently, Vazire (2010) put forth a general model to aid in determining which data source

might be the most valid for a given trait assessment, based on previous work by John and Robins

(1993) and Luft and Ingham (1955). The Self-Other Knowledge Asymmetry (SOKA) model
                                                                                Validity by Source 7


employs two primary dimensions—which can be considered as properties of the traits

themselves—to explicate the issue of source validity. The first consideration is the observability

of the trait. Traits with clear, frequent, and publicly available behavioral manifestations should

be judged quite accurately by knowledgeable informants. In extreme cases, such as extraversion,

it is reasonable to assume that aggregating a few independent judgments from someone almost

entirely unacquainted with the target individual may yield a fairly accurate estimate. On the

other hand, traits defined more by internal affective or cognitive aspects, such as neuroticism,

should be judged more accurately by the target herself than by others. However, these

predictions must be qualified based on the second factor in the SOKA model, evaluativeness, or

the extent to which the trait in question has a clearly socially desirable pole. For example, high

agreeableness (warmth, compassion) is a quality generally admired by others and sought after in

social relationships (Cuddy, Fiske, & Glick, 2006; Graziano & Eisenberg, 2007) and thus would

be considered highly evaluative. Traits such as this should be especially susceptible to both

positive and negative self-biases (i.e., by individual differences in self-enhancement/self-

deprecation) and thus accuracy for self-judgments, in particular, should be impaired. Traits for

which there is no clear polar preference in the population should be less susceptible to such

biases, leaving self-judgments largely unaffected. Thus, knowledgeable informants should be

more accurate than the self for highly evaluative traits. Overall, self-reports should be more

accurate than other-reports for traits low in observability (especially if they are also low in

evaluativeness) and other-reports should be more accurate than self-reports for traits high in

evaluativeness (especially if they are also high in observability).


       How, then, should one test these predictions? The first step is to determine where traits

lie on the observability and evaluativeness continua. Happily, some data exist about this for the
                                                                                 Validity by Source 8


Big Five traits (John & Robins, 1993). These data suggest that Extraversion and Neuroticism are

generally lower in evaluativeness (relative to Agreeableness, Conscientiousness, and Openness),

and that Extraversion is considerably more observable than the other domains. If one were to

plot the major dimensions of the Big Five along the observability and evaluativeness continua, it

might resemble something like Figure 1 (the placement of each dimension is based on Figures 4

and 5 in John & Robins, 1993), which yields predictions for accuracy across sources as seen in

Table 1. Readers may question the description of Neuroticism as low in evaluativeness, but John

and Robins’s data show that the two poles of this dimension are not especially far apart in social

desirability. This suggests that people should not be especially afraid of being judged harshly for

being high (or low) on Neuroticism, and thus motivated reasoning should not be a threat to self-

reports. Moreover, Neuroticism’s low level of observability is a threat to the validity of

informant reports.


       In order to test these predictions, Vazire (2010) presented results based on a series of

laboratory tasks relevant to three primary domains (extraversion, intellect, and neuroticism) and

found general support for the SOKA model in that (a) self-ratings of Neuroticism (low

observability, low evaluativeness) predicted neuroticism-relevant behaviors (e.g., nervous hand

movements during a speech) better than did ratings of Neuroticism by knowledgeable informants

or strangers, (b) informant-rated intellect (high observability, high evaluativeness) predicted

intellect/creativity-related behaviors (e.g., performance on a creativity test) better than did ratings

of intellect by the self or strangers, and (c) self-, informant-, and stranger-rated Extraversion

(high observability, low evaluativeness) predicted extraversion-relevant behaviors (e.g., talking)

equally well.
                                                                                Validity by Source 9


       These initial findings are certainly interesting, but as is the case with any new theory,

further tests of its generalizability are warranted. Specifically, there has been a recent push to

take personality and social psychology back outside the laboratory (Baumeister, Vohs, & Funder,

2007; Furr, 2009; Wilson & Vazire, 2015). Personality psychology, in particular, is a science

concerned with consistent, everyday thoughts, feelings, and behavior. The move into the

laboratory and away from the field has been driven primarily by practicality: observing behavior

as it naturally unfolds is difficult and time-consuming. However, recent innovations in

technology and experience sampling have facilitated naturalistic observation. One particularly

useful method for personality research has been the Electronically Activated Recorder (EAR;

Mehl, Pennebaker, Crow, Dabbs, & Price, 2001; Mehl & Holleran, 2007; Mehl & Robbins,

2012), which systematically samples ambient sounds in a given individual’s natural

environment. This method has already helped to shed light on several topics, including

narcissism (Holtzman, Vazire, & Mehl, 2010), gender (Mehl, Vazire, Ramírez-Esparza, Slatcher,

& Pennebaker, 2007) and ethnic (Ramirez-Esparza & Mehl, 2009) personality stereotypes, mood

fluctuations (Hasler, Mehl, Bootzin, & Vazire, 2008), well-being (Mehl, Vazire, Holleran, &

Clark, 2010) and depression (Mehl, 2006; Slatcher & Trentacosta, 2011; Robbins, Mehl,

Holleran, & Kasle, 2011), and even determinants of problem behavior in children (Slatcher &

Robles, 2012). Especially noteworthy are two studies which employed this methodology and

have bearing on the current question: which source of personality information is most valid for a

given trait? Mehl, Gosling, and Pennebaker (2006) investigated—among other things—the

predictive validity of self-reported standings on Big Five variables, finding significant trait-

behavior relations for Extraversion (e.g., talking), Agreeableness (e.g., time spent in public),

Conscientiousness (e.g., time spent in class), and Neuroticism (e.g., time spent arguing). Vazire
                                                                             Validity by Source 10


and Mehl (2008) took a slightly different approach, gathering self and informant predictions of

specific classes of behavior and comparing these estimates to EAR-derived measures of these

same behaviors. Specifically, they asked participants to estimate the relative frequency

(compared to the average person) with which they engaged in a behavior (e.g., watching TV),

obtained parallel estimates from knowledgeable informants, and then examined the predictive

power of these estimates both jointly and separately. Individually, each perspective predicted

relevant behavioral criteria equally well (mean r across 20 behaviors for self and single

informants were .26 and .23, respectively), and both perspectives provided unique predictive

validity in regression analyses.


The Current Study


       The current study aims to build on this previous work and provide another preliminary

test of Vazire’s (2010) SOKA model. To this end, we gathered self-, knowledgeable informant-,

and stranger-ratings of Big Five variables and compared these to relevant EAR-derived

behavioral codings from observation over two-day periods. To our knowledge, this is the first

study which includes each of these three rater sources in conjunction with naturalistic

observation, allowing for a unique test of the SOKA model. However, due to the intensive nature

of collecting and coding EAR data, we were only able to collect a small amount of evidence.

Thus, the results presented here should be considered preliminary – a “proof of concept” for how

methods like the EAR can be used to test SOKA and other theories about the accuracy of self-

and other-reports. We hope future research will use this approach as a model and provide more

data in order to reach more definitive conclusions about the validity of self- and other-reports of

personality using actual, naturalistic behavior as a criterion.
                                                                              Validity by Source 11


Predictions


       Given the extant data (cf. Mehl, Gosling, & Pennebaker, 2006; Vazire & Mehl, 2008) and

the theoretical predictions derived from the SOKA model (Vazire, 2010), we expected (1) that

self-ratings of personality will predict relevant acoustically-encoded behavior in low

evaluativeness domains, namely, Extraversion and Neuroticism, and to a lesser degree

Agreeableness and Conscientiousness, and (2) that informant-ratings of personality will predict

relevant acoustically-encoded behavior in high observability domains, namely, Extraversion, and

to a lesser degree Agreeableness and Conscientiousness. The nature of the criterion variables

will of course limit predictive power for low observability traits in general. Given previous

findings regarding the validity of judgments of Extraversion under conditions of near zero

acquaintance (Beer & Watson, 2008; Borkenau & Liebler, 1992; Naumann, Vazire, Rentfrow, &

Gosling, 2009; Norman & Goldberg, 1966; Vazire, 2010) and Extraversion’s status as a highly

observable trait, we would expect that (3) strangers’ ratings of Extraversion will correspond to

relevant target behavior as well as do self and informant ratings. All of this said, given the

dissimilarity in bandwidth (cf. Ashton, Jackson, Paunonen, Helmes, & Rothstein, 1995) between

the predictors and criteria in this study (general trait measures versus specific behavioral

manifestations over a relatively short observation period), we would expect that the effect sizes

in this study will be unlikely to exceed r = .30 in most cases (for a similar case, see Mehl,

Gosling, & Pennebaker, 2006).


                                              Method


Participants
                                                                             Validity by Source 12


       The initial participant pool consisted of 114 college students (84 female, 66 Caucasian,

44 African American) mostly recruited from lower-level psychology courses. Individuals

received partial fulfillment of a course requirement in exchange for their participation. One

participant withdrew from the study, and missing or incomplete data also generate some

instability in the sample size for various analyses. Additionally, sporadic equipment failure

impacted approximately 20% of cases, thus the effective maximum sample size for key analyses

was 87. These 87 participants did not differ significantly in terms of personality or

demographics (62 female, 49 Caucasian, 35 African American) from the initial pool of 114

participants.


        Sample size was determined in part by available time and resources, but we chose a

round number of 100 initially for a couple of reasons. First and perhaps weakest, previous work

of this type (e.g., Vazire & Mehl, 2008) involved samples of similar size. Second, the desired

sample size of 250 (where correlations are quite stable) seemed practically impossible given

available resources, so we opted for a goal of approximately 100, as a population effect size of

.20 with a corridor of stability of .15 produces a point of stability at approximately N = 100 with

80% confidence (Schonbrodt & Perugini, 2013). Data loss of various sorts (primarily

mechanical equipment failure) brought the usable dataset down to 84 for most analyses.


Phase 1: Initial Laboratory Session


       Participants arrived at the laboratory individually and were asked to complete a

demographic survey, some brief personality measures, and compile some lists of personal facts

and preferences in open-ended form. After this, the experimenter introduced the EAR,

explaining how the device worked and the parameters of the remainder of the study. Participants
                                                                               Validity by Source 13


were asked to wear the EAR as often as possible but to keep the device out of harm’s way (e.g.,

water, contact sports). Participants were also informed of the confidentiality policies, which

included the freedom to delete any or all recorded data during or subsequent to the return of the

device 48 hours later (for a description of similar confidentiality policies, see Mehl &

Pennebaker, 2003).


Phase 2: Assessment of Naturalistic Behavior


       Participants wore the EAR for two consecutive days, always starting on a Monday.

Given that most of our days are indeed weekdays, we thought important variation in behavior

could be observed during this time frame. The EAR was scheduled to record for thirty-second

intervals once every 12 minutes. In addition, the EAR was set to hibernate between the hours of

11:30pm and 7:30am. Thus, the maximum number of possible 30-second observations for each

participant was 160. The average number of total files received per person was 137 (SD = 44).

As mentioned previously, the devices occasionally experienced sudden, unexplained failure

resulting in massive data loss due to the fact that these failures typically occurred relatively early

in the observation process. As a result, we decided only to use cases in which at least 150

recordings were present upon return of the device. This effectively reduced the pool from 114 to

87 participants. However, in this subset of participants, the average number of total files

received per participant was 158. Most importantly, the subset of participants with at least 150

available files did not differ significantly from the full sample in terms of self- or informant-

reported personality variables.


       To assess obtrusiveness of the methodology and general compliance, we asked

participants a series of questions upon conclusion of the study, to which they responded using a
                                                                                Validity by Source 14


5-point scale (1 = not at all, 5 = a great deal). These self-reports indicate that participants were

generally only somewhat aware of the EAR (M = 2.96, SD = .96) and did not feel uncomfortable

wearing it (M = 1.84, SD = 1.15). They also reported that they were not impeded (M = 1.45, SD

= .82) by the EAR, nor did it alter daily behavior (M = 1.55, SD = .75). Though participants did

report others being aware of (M = 3.58, SD = 1.14) and talking about (M = 3.69, SD = 1.01) the

EAR, they did not feel that others altered their behavior due to the presence of the EAR (M =

2.20, SD = 1.20). On average, participants estimated that they spent 85% (SD = 12%) of their

waking hours wearing the EAR, and on a scale of 1 (not at all typical) to 5 (very typical) they

rated the two-day observation as fairly typical (M = 4.01, SD = 1). Though these estimates are

for the full sample, the parallel estimates from participants with 150 or more available files were

basically identical.


        A team of 5 coders evaluated the resulting files using a revised and expanded version of

the Social and Environmental Coding of Sound Inventory (SECSI; Mehl et al., 2006). The

system assesses four major categories: interactions (e.g., talking with a group, talking with one

other, on the phone, etc.), activities (e.g., eating, sleeping, watching television), moods (e.g.,

laughing, singing, crying), and locations (e.g., in apartment, in transit, in public). In addition to

these categories, coders evaluated each segment in terms of the six basic emotions (happiness,

sadness, anger, fear, surprise, disgust) and, in the event of conversation, the type of conversation

(e.g., deep, gossip, practical). Finally, we constructed an auditory behavioral measurement

model for the Big Five, covering Extraversion (behavioral classes included dominance,

affiliation, and energy), Neuroticism (worrying, complaining, sadness), Openness to Experience

(creativity, unconventionality, spirituality), Agreeableness (sympathy, concern for others,

affection), and Conscientiousness (cleaning, hygiene, responsibility). Due to generally low
                                                                              Validity by Source 15


within-domain correspondence (perhaps due to low base rate in some cases), these behavioral

classes were considered separately for analysis.


       Coders were asked to listen to each file in a given case and evaluate it with respect to the

58 distinct categories (for a complete list and description of all categories, see the appendix). For

example, if the participant was talking angrily about a friend to another friend over lunch, the

coder would be expected to mark a “1” in the spreadsheet under “talking with one other”,

“talking with friend”, “gossip”, “anger”, “in public”, and “eating”, perhaps among other things,

depending on the circumstances. To establish reliability, the five coders all evaluated four semi-

randomly selected (to reflect the breadth of the target demographics) complete cases, which

consisted of 632 total files. ICC[2, 1] exceeded .30 for most categories with a reasonable base

rate of occurrence (see Table 2 for specific information). Particularly unreliable or incredibly

low frequency behaviors were generally omitted from further analysis.


       These raw codings were then converted to time-use estimates by dividing the number of

coded instances in a given category by the number of total usable files1. The latter was defined

by files in which some ambient sound of any kind could be detected. In the case of complete

silence (which should be rare, given that the EAR successfully captured things as quiet as the

turning of pages), coders were instructed to flag the file, and long periods of silence were

compared to participant diaries2 to confirm non-compliance (e.g., left EAR in the car). These

flagged files were subtracted from the total number of files to produce the denominator in the

time-use estimates. For the 87 participants who met the base file requirement, an average of 128

files per person were deemed usable (SD = 18). Conversely, the omitted cases only averaged 48

usable files per participant (SD = 29), further justifying the omission of these cases from further

analysis. These proportions would serve as the central criterion for all subsequent analyses.
                                                                               Validity by Source 16


Phase 3: Second Laboratory Session


       Exactly 48 hours after having received the EAR, participants returned to the laboratory,

at which point they completed the EAR compliance questionnaire. They then took part in a brief

videotaped interview and were asked to provide the email addresses of two people who knew

them well. We then contacted these individuals and asked them to complete a personality

inventory (administered online) about the target individual (see Vazire, 2006 for a description of

the general procedure). Of the possible 228 informants, we received 138 responses, with two

informant reports for 50 participants, one for 88, and zero for 26.


       Participants were also given the opportunity to review their EAR files at this point. Most

declined the opportunity, though approximately 10% requested a copy of their files for personal

use. Only two participants asked that we delete specific files (a total of three files), and, as

mentioned previously, one participant asked that all files be deleted.


Phase 4: Stranger Ratings


       Several months after the conclusion of the laboratory sessions and as part of a subsequent

study, we obtained personality ratings about the target individuals from a sample of individuals

who were entirely unacquainted with these targets. In this study, judges made three separate

personality evaluations of each target after having received three different kinds of information

about the target: a three-item list of individuating facts written by the target participant about

him/herself, a three-item list of personal values also written by the target participant (see Beer &

Brooks, 2011, for a description of these types of information), and a muted video segment

(approximately one-minute in length on average) from the Phase 1 laboratory session. The

videos were muted for reasons related to the original goals of this second study. These three
                                                                             Validity by Source 17


estimates were averaged within-rater, and each target was judged by three raters. The within-

rater (across trial) coefficient alphas ranged from .71 (Extraversion) to .82 (Openness), and the

within-trial (across rater) coefficient alphas ranged from .15 (Neuroticism) to .52 (Extraversion).

Given the low number of items (3 in each case), these estimates were not so low as to preclude

overall aggregation. Thus, the stranger-generated personality estimates for subsequent analyses

represents an aggregate of nine ratings: three from each of three judges per target.


Measures


       We assessed personality using the Big Five Inventory (BFI; John, Naumann, & Soto,

2008). The 44-item version of the BFI contains 8-item scales assessing Neuroticism and

Extraversion, a 10-item Openness scale, and 9-item measures of Agreeableness and

Conscientiousness. The participants rated themselves using a five-point scale (1= disagree

strongly, 5 = agree strongly) in response to a series of adjectives and phrases following a stem

statement (“I see myself as someone who…”). This instrument was used for all ratings, and the

informant- and stranger-rating forms featured a modified stem (“I see this person as someone

who…”). Coefficient alphas for the scales ranged from .75 to .91, from .83 to .90, and from .87

to .94 for self-, informant-, and stranger-ratings, respectively. Behavior was acoustically

captured via the EAR, which in this case was a Dell Axim v50, housed in a protective case.


                                              Results


Descriptive Statistics: Behavior


       As described above, coders evaluated each audio file for the 87 eligible participants along

56 dimensions. Table 2 provides the frequency estimates and inter-coder reliability for these

behavioral variables. The reliability estimates are based on the five coders’ ratings of four
                                                                              Validity by Source 18


participants’ complete files, whereas all other target participants’ files were only coded by one

coder. Vazire and Mehl (2008) reported ICC (2,k) estimates, as the likely intended use for EAR

coding was in the form of aggregated ratings. However, the present application is to single-rater

EAR estimates, thus ICC (2,1) estimates are more appropriate. For comparative purposes, Table

2 contains the ICC (2,1) estimates first, followed by the ICC (2,k) estimates. As the second

column of the table indicates, the intraclass (ICC [2, k]) correlations that captured inter-coder

reliability exceeded .70 in most (30) cases. There were 12 behaviors that did not occur in any of

the 4 cases used for establishing reliability estimates and 16 behaviors for which the intraclass

correlations were lower than .70. Several of the latter instances occurred for variables that were

generally low base rate behaviors in this population (e.g., energy, worrying, substance use).

Obviously, the ICC (2,1) values are considerably lower, potentially limiting the possibility of

detecting relations with external criteria. However, comparable reliability estimates did not

preclude the observation of substantial correlations with external measures in previous research

(Mehl, Gosling, & Pennebaker, 2006; Vazire & Mehl, 2008). Due to the sampling method for

obtaining reliability estimates, we thought it prudent to retain all variables for subsequent

analyses, with the understanding that the low reliability for some of these variables would

certainly impact the likelihood of observing convergent relations with the trait predictors.


Descriptive Statistics: Personality Measures


       Table 3 provides the means and standard deviations for judgments of the Big Five by

source. Since there were no significant differences for any source between trait estimates for

participants with eligible EAR files (greater than 150 files obtained) and those falling short of

that requirement, we have provided the full-sample estimates. These descriptive statistics may

give some clues to the validity of each source. For example, some recent work has indicated that
                                                                               Validity by Source 19


informants recruited using methods similar to those employed in this study may suffer from a

“pal-serving bias” (Leising, Erbs, & Fritz, 2010) which may appear in the form of means closer

to the extreme ends of the scale and smaller standard deviations (restricted variance) on

evaluative traits (cf. Wood & Wortman, 2012). Comparisons of standard deviations across

methods was complicated by differential aggregation, so we will focus primarily on mean

comparisons. For Agreeableness, Neuroticism, and Conscientiousness, we observed no

substantial mean differences (ds range from -.19 to .08) among the three judgment sources.

Informant ratings for Open to Experience were higher than strangers’ ratings of targets (d = .85)

and the targets’ self ratings (d = .49). A similar pattern emerged for Extraversion, with

informants rating targets higher than did strangers (d = .80) and slightly higher than targets rated

themselves (d = .31). However, Extraversion is the least evaluative of the Big Five traits so these

mean differences do not necessarily reflect a strong positivity bias among informants.


Bivariate Relations: Preliminary Analysis


       Another method for examining potential issues with scale validity involves examining the

inter-trait associations. Table 4 provides the multitrait-multimethod matrix (MTMM) for all trait

judgments in this study. For all correlations, we first calculated scale scores, then aggregated

across raters as necessary (i.e., for informant and stranger ratings). First, there is evidence of an

acquaintanceship effect (Funder & Colvin, 1988; Watson, Hubbard, & Wiese, 2000) as

evidenced by the convergent relations across the three sources. Self-informant agreement was

quite strong for Neuroticism, Extraversion, and Openness to Experience, and somewhat weaker

for Agreeableness and Conscientiousness. The self-stranger convergent correlations exceeded

.20 for all traits except Conscientiousness (r = .07), though all effects were small (rs < .30).

Finally, the informant-stranger relations tended to be weak, with only Extraversion (r = .34)
                                                                               Validity by Source 20


showing agreement greater than .20. The discriminant relations, however, are probably of more

interest in the current study. The heterotrait-heteromethod relations tended to be quite small in

most cases, with only 5 of the 60 correlations exceeding |.20| and all being fairly small in

magnitude (rs < |.34|). Four of these correlations could be found off the diagonal in the self-

informant heteromethod block. Still, the convergent-discriminant pattern for self and informant

judgments was largely solid in that convergent relations were generally stronger than the

discriminant relations. The stranger judgments, however, showed little convergence (monotrait-

heteromethod relations) and all but one heterotrait-monomethod relation (Openness-

Conscientiousness) exceeded |.20|, with a few being quite strong (e.g., Neuroticism-Extraversion,

r = -.55). Though shared method variance was evident in all three sources, there was a general

trend toward more and stronger intercorrelations among trait judgments with decreasing

acquaintanceship, parallel with previous findings (Beer & Watson, 2008b). This stronger halo

effect may serve to depress each scale’s relations with external criteria for informant- and

especially stranger-ratings. Thus, one might expect that informant- and stranger-ratings may fare

worse in terms of behavior prediction, in general, than self-ratings of personality, in part due to

the lower differentiation among traits for those raters.


Bivariate Relations: Criterion Validity


       The central focus of this study is behavior prediction from personality judgments. What

follows is a trait-by-trait analysis of the criterion validity of trait judgments by each source. In

addition to the aggregates described previously, we calculated single-informant and single-

stranger estimates for each personality variable. The single-informant estimates were obtained

by simply excluding the second informant from each aggregated informant estimate. We did this

because the first informant would most likely reflect the response we would have gotten had we
                                                                                Validity by Source 21


only asked for one informant. Furthermore, given that target-chosen informant ratings tend to be

uniformly high in liking and positivity (Leising, Erbs, & Fritz, 2010), we did not suspect that

randomly choosing an informant would significantly alter the results. The single-stranger ratings

still include some aggregation, as each estimate represents the average of three successive

judgments made by one perceiver. However, the single-stranger estimates result from

calculating the trait-behavior correlation for each of three perceivers across targets, Fisher-

transforming these correlations, averaging them, and then back-transforming these estimates.

We will primarily discuss the aggregated estimates, but the single-rater estimates are available

for comparison purposes. These help address the question of whether any differences across the

three sources (self, informant, stranger) could be due to the fact that there was greater

aggregation for some sources than others (stranger > informants > self), which would have led to

greater reliabilities and therefore more opportunity for predictive validity.


       Given the mismatch in bandwidth of the predictors (generalized trait measures as

assessed by questionnaire) and criteria (EAR-coded behavior over a two-day period as assessed

by frequency counts) in this study, we expected small effects. However, as described above, the

intensive nature of data collection and coding for this study precluded us from achieving the

sample size we would need to have adequate statistical power to reject the null hypothesis when

effects are small. Thus, we decided not to focus on p-values and instead chose to examine these

relations in terms of effect sizes and confidence intervals only, interpreting effects of the typical

size (rs in the .20s) observed in previous studies connecting trait ratings and EAR-coded

behaviors (cf. Mehl, Gosling, & Pennebaker, 2006) as evidence for an association. Specifically,

we will be noting correlations at or exceeding |.20| in magnitude throughout the following

sections. We want to emphasize that our design does not permit precise effect size estimation,
                                                                               Validity by Source 22


and should be followed up with more data to refine the effect size estimates. We know of at least

one larger EAR study (N = 380) that has been in progress for four years and is expected to yield

data that can attempt to replicate these analyses within the next few years (Vazire et al., in

progress). Thus, the purpose of the results presented here is to provide preliminary evidence

regarding the validity of self- and other-reports of personality against a naturalistic, behavioral

criterion, and to provide a framework for linking Big Five traits to EAR-coded behaviors in

future studies.


       For each section, we first identified (a priori) a subset of trait-relevant behaviors and then

examined the correlations between trait judgments from each source and these criterion

behaviors. We begin with Extraversion, the trait with the most theoretically relevant acoustically

coded behavioral manifestations, and progress to Openness to Experience, the trait with the

fewest theoretically relevant acoustically coded behavioral manifestations.


       Extraversion. Given the conceptual definition of extraversion, we expected that trait

judgments should predict behaviors related to sociability (e.g. various talking behavior,

socializing, affiliation, being in public places), positive emotionality (e.g., laughing, singing,

happiness), and general activity or arousal seeking (e.g., energy, listening to music, being in

transit). Furthermore, in accordance with the SOKA model, we expected that self-, informant-,

and stranger-ratings would show relatively equivalent criterion validity in this domain. Table 5

provides the relevant relations between self-, informant-, and stranger-rated Extraversion and

theoretically relevant behavioral manifestations of extraversion.


       In terms of sociability, all three sources predicted talking with friends, while only

informant judgments predicted talking with one other person. Interestingly, all three correlations
                                                                                     Validity by Source 23


with “talking with a romantic partner” were negative (rself = -.19; rinformant = -.15; rstranger = -.23).

Although it is not surprising that this relation is not positive, the fact that spending more of one’s

time spent talking with a romantic partner is associated with introversion was unanticipated. In

line with expectations, both self- and informant-ratings of Extraversion predicted engaging in

gossip (rself = .20; rinformant = .21) and practical conversations (rself = .21; rinformant = .23), and

stranger-ratings of Extraversion predicted affiliative behavior (r = .24). However, none of the

three sources predicted socializing at or above r = .20.


        In terms of general activity or arousal seeking, informant- and stranger-rated Extraversion

predicted time spent in transit (rinformant = .30; rstranger = .21), stranger ratings predicted time spent

listening to music (r = .24), and all three sources predicted energetic behavior (rself = .21; rinformant

= .23; rstranger = .22).


        Finally, in terms of positive emotionality, self- and stranger-reports both predicted

laughing (rself = .22; rstranger = .23), self-reports predicted singing (r = .21) and stranger-rated

Extraversion predicted coded happiness (r = .39).


        In summary, each perspective on Extraversion showed some degree of criterion validity,

with aggregated stranger-ratings showing the strongest relations overall. This is not entirely

surprising, given previous findings with respect to the validity of stranger-rated extraversion in

low acquaintance situations (Beer & Watson, 2008a, 2010; Naumann et al., 2009; Norman &

Goldberg, 1966; Vazire, 2010; Watson, 1989) and predictions derived from the SOKA model.

The benefit of aggregation is somewhat pronounced, however. When using single informants and

single strangers (results listed in Table 5), the average absolute magnitude of the predictive

validity of self-ratings (mean absolute r = .14), informant-ratings (mean absolute r = .16) and
                                                                              Validity by Source 24


stranger ratings (mean absolute r = .14) show that these three sources predicted Extraversion-

related behavior at similar levels.


        Neuroticism. Given the conceptual definition of neuroticism, we expected that trait

measures of the construct would predict behaviors related to negative mood states3 (e.g., sadness,

anger, crying, complaining), social withdrawal (e.g., time at home or indoors), and markers of

mental or physical illness (e.g., sleeping, coughing, less working). Given that Neuroticism could

be considered relatively low in observability and in evaluativeness, we expected self-ratings to

more strongly predict relevant behaviors than informant- or stranger-ratings and informant-

ratings to outperform stranger-ratings.


        Table 6 provides the correlations between self-, informant-, and stranger-ratings of

Neuroticism and neuroticism-relevant behavior, as captured by the EAR. Contrary to

predictions, informant-ratings seemed to best predict behavior, with at least one of the

aggregated- or single-informant estimates of Neuroticism predicting 6 of the 11 relevant

behaviors at r = |.20| and yielding estimates approaching this value for 2 of the remaining 5 (the

three exceptions—sighing, complaining, worrying—were low reliability and/or low base rate

behaviors in this sample). Conversely, self- and stranger-rated Neuroticism failed to predict any

relevant behavior. More specifically, effect sizes were strongest for informants (mean absolute r

= .18), followed by self-ratings (mean absolute r = .09) and stranger-ratings (mean absolute r =

.06).


        Conscientiousness. Given the conceptual definition of conscientiousness, we expected

trait ratings to predict goal-oriented behavior (e.g., attending class, studying, time on computer

and less television viewing), organization and preparation (e.g., cleaning and hygienic behavior),
                                                                              Validity by Source 25


norm adherence (e.g., low substance use, low swearing, refraining from gossip), and

responsibility. Given that conscientiousness could be described as moderately observable and

evaluative, the SOKA model does not make a clear prediction regarding which perspective

should be most valid. However, since it is not highly evaluative and conscientiousness is a trait

that typically generates stronger convergence even in lower acquaintance situations (e.g,

Borkenau & Liebler, 1992), we expected that all three sources would have some validity, with

self- and informant-ratings more strongly predicting relevant behavior due to greater access to

information. We would also perhaps expect a slight advantage for informant-judgments (relative

to self-judgments) due to the impact of its moderate evaluativeness.


       Table 7 provides the correlations between self-, informant-, and stranger-ratings of

Conscientiousness and Conscientiousness-relevant behavior, as captured by the EAR. These

data are less interpretable than those for Extraversion and Neuroticism. Stranger-rated

Conscientiousness shows some strong evidence of criterion validity, predicting time spent in

class (r = .31), sleeping (r = -.27), and swearing (r = -.41). Indeed, one would expect highly

conscientious individuals to be in class, not swear, and be awake more often between the hours

of 7:30 am and 11:30 pm (this effect is likely driven by differences in the early part of the day).


       Self-ratings of Conscientiousness predicted less time spent on the computer (r = -.26),

less time engaged in gossip (r = -.20), and swearing less often (r = -.25). At first glance, the

inverse relation with time spent on the computer would seem puzzling, but in our sample, coders

reported that computers were typically used as a distraction (e.g., video games, viral videos)

rather than for the ostensible completion of work-related tasks.
                                                                              Validity by Source 26


        Informants generally fared relatively worse (compared with self- and stranger-ratings) in

terms of criterion validity in this category, predicting only sleeping (r = -.23) in the hypothesized

direction (single informants predicted swearing in a manner contrary to hypothesis, r = .23).

This is not entirely surprising, given the relatively weak convergent/discriminant pattern

displayed by informant-rated Conscientiousness (see Table 4) in this study. Thus, the

hypotheses for this trait were largely unsupported.


        Agreeableness. Given the conceptual definition of Agreeableness, we expected trait

ratings in this domain to predict behaviors that indicated investment in relationships and concern

for others (e.g., talking to romantic partners or family, engaging in personal conversations,

sympathy, affection, concern for others) and the avoidance of confrontation (e.g., less anger).

Given that Agreeableness is moderately evaluative and not easily visible at low acquaintance

(Ames & Bianchi, 2008), we expected that informant-ratings would better predict relevant

behaviors than would self-ratings, and that stranger-ratings would show very little criterion

validity.


        Table 8 provides the correlations between self-, informant-, and stranger-ratings of

Agreeableness and Agreeableness-relevant behavior, as captured by the EAR. The most obvious

feature of this table is the lack of substantial relations between ratings of Agreeableness and

relevant behavior. The lack of predicted correlations suggest the possibility that the EAR (or the

coding system employed) did not adequately capture Agreeableness-related behavior, so with

respect to the hypotheses tested, we would consider the results inconclusive, and encourage

future EAR research to explore other possible acoustically-detectable behavioral manifestations

of Agreeableness.
                                                                               Validity by Source 27


       Openness to Experience. Given the conceptual definition of Openness to Experience, we

expected trait ratings to predict creativity, unconventionality, and engagement in philosophical

discussion (deep conversations) and exploratory behavior (substance use). Given the high

evaluativeness of Openness (as assessed by the BFI) and its low observability, particularly to

strangers, we expected that self- and informant-ratings would better predict Openness-relevant

behavior than stranger-ratings, with a slight advantage to informant-ratings.


       Table 9 provides the correlations between self-, informant-, and stranger-ratings of

Openness and Openness-relevant behavior, as captured by the EAR. With one exception

(substance use), stranger-ratings of Openness generally failed to predict relevant behavior.

Informant-ratings of Openness tended to more strongly (though still modestly) predict relevant

behavior. Specifically, aggregated informant ratings predicted substance use (r = .22), and the

single informant estimate predicted unconventionality (r = .26). Self-ratings predicted only

EAR-coded creativity (r = .22). The relations between self- and informant-rated Openness and

creativity and unconventionality, in particular, are noteworthy due to the extremely low base

rates for each of these behavioral categories.


       Overall, it would seem that the EAR (or, again, the coding system employed in the

current study) generally fails to capture Openness-relevant behavior. However, to the extent that

it does, informant ratings seemed to be the most valid of the three sources.


                                            Discussion


       We obtained personality measures from three sources (self, knowledgeable informants,

and strangers) in an attempt to provide a preliminary test of the predictive validity of each with

respect to a naturalistic behavioral criterion. Due to the intensive nature of data collection and
                                                                               Validity by Source 28


coding, we were not able to collect enough data to provide precise estimates of the effects we

examined, and so our results should be interpreted with some degree of caution. Rather than

drawing firm conclusions from these results, we encourage readers to consider this study as a

framework for future research to provide more evidence regarding this important research

question. The summary of our findings that follows should be read with the understanding that

there is still a great deal of uncertainty around all of these results.


        At the outset, we made three general predictions. First, we predicted that self-ratings of

personality would predict relevant acoustically-encoded behavior in the domains of Extraversion,

Agreeableness, Conscientiousness, and Neuroticism. In fact, self-reports only predicted behavior

to an acceptable degree in the domain of Extraversion. One possible explanation for these results

is that the evaluativeness of Agreeableness and Conscientiousness impaired the accuracy of self-

reports, and that Neuroticism may in fact be more evaluative (and therefore harder for the self to

judge accurately) than previous findings suggest. Looming large over this general predictive

failure, however, is the fact that informant and/or stranger perspectives are likely more similar to

those of the coders than those of the self. In other words, it is likely that informant and stranger

personality ratings are based heavily on behavioral observation, whereas self-ratings are likely

based on a combination of behavior and mental states (thoughts, feelings, intentions, etc.).


        We also predicted that informant ratings would predict behavior for Extraversion,

Agreeableness, and Conscientiousness, whereas in actuality, these ratings predicted relevant

behaviors for Extraversion, Neuroticism and Openness. These findings are inconsistent with

previous research that suggests that Neuroticism and Openness are hard for others to judge

because of their low observability (but see Vazire & Solomon, 2015, for a discussion of

contextual variation in the observability of traits). If future research corroborates these findings,
                                                                                Validity by Source 29


that would suggest that informants may be a better source than previously thought for assessing

Neuroticism and Openness. However, our final general prediction—that stranger ratings of

Extraversion would predict relevant target behavior as well as self or informant ratings—was

strongly supported.


Limitations


       To our knowledge, this is the only study to date that has examined the validity of trait

judgments from the self, informants, and strangers with respect to a naturalistic behavioral

criterion. This key advantage, however, is offset by a few limitations. First and foremost, in a

current scientific culture keenly (and appropriately) interested in power and replicability, the

central analyses included in this paper are based on a fairly small sample size. In our opinion,

the incorporation of real-life behavior—and the methodological and analytic difficulties that

such incorporation poses—justifies the value of this study despite its small sample size, but this

does not change the fact that our results are inconclusive. Future endeavors should aim to (a)

gather similar data from more people, (b) employ longer (than two days) observation periods, (c)

employ multiple (non-contiguous) observation periods, and (d) include measures for increasing

the reliability of the behavioral coding (i.e., multiple coders for all files, refinement of coding

system). Although accomplishing these goals simultaneously is a somewhat daunting task, we

believe that this would provide a clearer picture of the validity of these judgments and allow for

some more sophisticated data analysis aimed at more detailed research questions. In the interim,

researchers without access to the resources to conduct such a study should continue to collect

behavioral data, and publish it without selection for significance (i.e., publish all results

including null and small effects), in order to provide unbiased material for later synthesis via

meta-analytic review.
                                                                              Validity by Source 30


       Secondly, although a chief advantage of this particular study, the prediction of behavior

in natural settings is only one method of criterion validation. In the end, the general concept of a

personality trait includes consistency in affective experience, cognition, and motivation in

addition to consistent patterns in behavior. Self reports, for example, did not grade out well in

our analyses, but this may not be an entirely fair test. Due to the self’s unique perspective,

perhaps one would expect that self-judgments might fail to predict some behavior. On the other

hand, for outside observers, the adage “behavior engulfs the field” takes on particular importance

in this instance. Principally in the case of the strangers, these trait judgments are formed solely

on small snippets of behavior. Thus, it would follow that predicting other behavior would be

simpler for them than, say, predicting emotional responses to events or understanding the reasons

for these actions. That said, we do not feel that this simple fact makes the validity of stranger

ratings tautological. The strangers in this study only had access to a few statements made by

each target and about a minute’s worth of nonverbal behavior in a laboratory setting. The fact

that this information could be utilized to make summary personality judgments that in turn

predicted behavior in real-world settings is still fairly impressive.


       Nevertheless, our criterion measure was restricted to observable (i.e., behavioral)

manifestations of traits, and thus likely favored observer- (i.e., informant- and stranger-) reports

over self-reports. To the extent that readers agree that behavioral manifestations of traits are most

central to personality, this is not necessarily a weakness of our criterion measure. However,

future research should try to incorporate criterion measures that also capture less overt

manifestations of the Big Five (e.g., subtle linguistic cues, behavioral residue, life outcomes).


Future Directions
                                                                               Validity by Source 31


       The work discussed here represents a small step toward understanding the utility and

validity of trait judgments from various sources. At its heart, this is among the most basic of

research programs in personality. However, seventy-plus years into the investigation of

personality traits, our sense of how actual behaviors tend to cluster together in individuals is still

somewhat limited. The SOKA model can be used as an orienting principle for elaborating on

this network.


       More practically, at the very least, these data, in conjunction with recent findings (Vazire,

2010; Vazire & Mehl, 2008) indicate that there may be key differences in the validity of trait

ratings by source, meaning that in practical application, we should rely on different predictor

variables depending upon the circumstance and focal dimension. For example, the potential of a

prospective sales representative might best be evaluated by a panel of strangers, whereas

clinicians might choose to seek informant reports of personality when considering a client’s

propensity for melancholy in the future (but see Carlson & Oltmanns, 2013). For researchers

investigating accurate personality perception, perhaps the same accuracy criterion is not

appropriate across traits. For example, self-ratings may serve as an appropriate accuracy

criterion for peer ratings of say, Neuroticism, but for Openness, knowledgeable informant ratings

may better index accuracy.


       Future research should also continue to improve upon our current methods of

naturalistically measuring behavior. Specifically, the rather coarse coding categories for

acoustically-detectable behavior probably underestimate the predictive validity of trait

judgments. Aside from drastically altering the method of data acquisition (e.g., using a video

analog to the EAR--which has important ethical constraints), there may be some ways to adjust

coding methods that could prove illuminating. For example, rather than employing pure
                                                                               Validity by Source 32


counting methods, coders might be instructed to listen to small segments of recordings and then

rate the personality state (Fleeson, 2007) of the individual at various time points. Furthermore,

methods such as this could be jointly employed with attempts to measure context or situation

type (Rauthmann et al., 2014), allowing for a slightly more objective evaluation of person-

situation interactive effects (Sherman, Nave, & Funder, 2010).


Conclusion


       Our study provides a framework for examining the fundamental question of whether

different perspectives – the self versus others – have complementary strengths and weaknesses

when it comes to accurately judging a person’s personality. We also provided the test of the

validity of these different perspectives against a naturalistic, objective behavioral criterion

measure. One lesson from this study is that the EAR may be an ideal method for collecting

behavioral measures of personality for some domains (e.g., Extraversion, Neuroticism) but not

others (e.g., emotions, Openness). For those domains for which the EAR provides reliable data

(e.g., Extraversion and Neuroticism), one intriguing possibility is that the EAR could potentially

pick up on some trait-relevant behavior that neither the self nor close others can judge very

accurately (e.g., some aspects of Conscientiousness). Behavioral measures, when reliable, could

also help adjudicate differences between the self and close others. These applications could be

extended to other domains where self- and other-reports may be untrustworthy or may disagree

(e.g., relationship behaviors, workplace behaviors, parent-child interactions). We hope this

approach will be used to address questions about self- and other-knowledge in a wide range of

contexts (Vazire & Wilson, 2012), questions that may have been intractable without the ability to

unobtrusively and objectively observe people’s naturalistic behavior.
Validity by Source 33
                                                                             Validity by Source 34




                                            References


Alicke, M. D. (1985). Global self-evaluation as determined by the desirability and controllability

       of trait adjectives. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 49, 1621-1630.

       doi:10.1037/0022-3514.49.6.1621


Andersen, S. M., & Ross, L. (1984). Self-knowledge and social inference: I. The impact of

       cognitive/affective and behavioral data. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology,

       46, 280-293. doi:10.1037/0022-3514.46.2.280


Ashton, M. C., Jackson, D. N., Paunonen, S. V., Helmes, E., & Rothstein, M. G. (1995). The

       criterion validity of broad factor scales versus specific facet scales. Journal of Research

       in Personality, 29, 432-442. doi:10.1006/jrpe.1995.1025


Back, M. D., & Vazire, S. (2012). Knowing our personality. In S. Vazire and T. D. Wilson (Eds.)

       Handbook of Self-Knowledge (pp. 131-156). New York, NY: Guilford Press.


Baumeister, R. F., Vohs, K. D., & Funder, D. C. (2007). Psychology as the science of self-

       reports and finger movements: Whatever happened to actual behavior? Perspectives on

       Psychological Science, 2, 396-403. doi:10.1111/j.1745-6916.2007.00051.x


Beer, A., & Brooks, C. (2011). Information quality in personality judgment: The value of

       personal disclosure. Journal of Research in Personality, 45, 175-185.

       doi:10.1016/j.jrp.2011.01.001
                                                                            Validity by Source 35


Beer, A., & Watson, D. (2008a). Personality judgment at zero acquaintance: Agreement,

       assumed similarity, and implicit simplicity. Journal of Personality Assessment, 90, 250-

       260. doi:10.1080/00223890701884970


Beer, A., & Watson, D. (2008b). Asymmetry in judgments of personality: Others are less

       differentiated than the self. Journal of Personality, 76, 535-559. doi:10.1111/j.1467-

       6494.2008.00495.x


Bollich, K. L., Rogers, K. H., & Vazire, S. (2015).Knowing more than we can tell: People are

       aware of their biased self-perceptions. Personality and Social Psychology Bulletin, 41,

       918-929. doi:10.1177/0146167215583993


Borkenau, P., & Liebler, A. (1992). Trait inferences: Sources of validity at zero acquaintance.

       Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 62, 645-657. doi:10.1037/0022-

       3514.62.4.645


Carlson, E. N., Vazire, S., & Oltmanns, T. F. (2013). Self‐other knowledge asymmetries in

       personality pathology. Journal of Personality, 81, 155-170.


Connelly, B. S., & Ones, D. S. (2010). An other perspective on personality: Meta-analytic

       integration of observers' accuracy and predictive validity. Psychological Bulletin, 136,

       1092-1122. doi:10.1037/a0021212


Cuddy, A. C., Fiske, S. T., & Glick, P. (2007). The BIAS map: Behaviors from intergroup affect

       and stereotypes. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 92, 631-648.

       doi:10.1037/0022-3514.92.4.631
                                                                             Validity by Source 36


Dunning, D., Heath, C., & Suls, J. M. (2004). Flawed Self-Assessment: Implications for Health,

       Education, and the Workplace. Psychological Science in the Public Interest, 5, 69-106.

       doi:10.1111/j.1529-1006.2004.00018.x


Furr, R. M. (2009). The study of behaviour in personality psychology: Meaning, importance and

       measurement. European Journal of Personality, 23, 437-453. doi:10.1002/per.726


Funder, D. C., & Colvin, C. R. (1988). Friends and strangers: Acquaintanceship, agreement, and

       the accuracy of personality judgment. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 55,

       149-158. doi:10.1037/0022-3514.55.1.149


Graziano, W. G., & Eisenberg, N. (1997). Agreeableness: A dimension of personality. In R.

       Hogan, J. A. Johnson, S. R. Briggs, R. Hogan, J. A. Johnson, S. R. Briggs (Eds.),

       Handbook of personality psychology (pp. 795-824). San Diego, CA, US: Academic Press.

       doi:10.1016/B978-012134645-4/50031-7


Hasler, B. P., Mehl, M. R., Bootzin, R. R., & Vazire, S. (2008). Preliminary evidence of diurnal

       rhythms in everyday behaviors associated with positive affect. Journal of Research in

       Personality, 42, 1537-1546. doi:10.1016/j.jrp.2008.07.012


Holtzman, N. S., Vazire, S., & Mehl, M. R. (2010). Sounds like a narcissist: Behavioral

       manifestations of narcissism in everyday life. Journal of Research in Personality, 44,

       478-484. doi:10.1016/j.jrp.2010.06.001


John, O. P., Naumann, L. P., & Soto, C. J. (2008). Paradigm shift to the integrative Big Five trait

       taxonomy: History, measurement, and conceptual issues. In O. P. John, R. W. Robins, L.
                                                                            Validity by Source 37


       A. Pervin, O. P. John, R. W. Robins, L. A. Pervin (Eds.), Handbook of personality:

       Theory and research (3rd ed.) (pp. 114-158). New York, NY, US: Guilford Press.


John, O. P., & Robins, R. W. (1993). Determinants of interjudge agreement on personality traits:

       The Big Five domains, observability, evaluativeness, and the unique perspective of the

       self. Journal of Personality, 61, 521-551. doi:10.1111/j.1467-6494.1993.tb00781.x


Jones, E. E., & Nisbett, R. E. (1971). The actor and the observer: Divergent perceptions of the

       causes of behavior. Morristown, NJ: General Learning Press.


Kolar, D. W., Funder, D. C., & Colvin, C. R. (1996). Comparing the accuracy of personality

       judgments by the self and knowledgeable others. Journal of Personality, 64, 311-337.

       doi:10.1111/j.1467-6494.1996.tb00513.x


Kwan, V. Y., Diaz, P., Wojcik, S. P., Kim, S. Y., Matula, K. A., & Rodriguez, K. (2011). Self as

       the target and the perceiver: A componential approach to self-enhancement.

       Psychological Studies, 56, 151-158. doi:10.1007/s12646-011-0072-3


Leising, D., Erbs, J., & Fritz, U. (2010). The letter of recommendation effect in informant ratings

       of personality. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 98, 668-682.

       doi:10.1037/a0018771


Leising, D., Gallrein, A. B., & Dufner, M. (2014). Judging the behavior of people we know:

       Objective assessment, confirmation of preexisting views, or both? Personality and Social

       Psychology Bulletin, 40, 153-163. doi:10.1177/0146167213507287
                                                                             Validity by Source 38


Letzring, T. D., Wells, S. M., & Funder, D. C. (2006). Information quantity and quality affect the

       realistic accuracy of personality judgment. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology,

       91, 111-123. doi:10.1037/0022-3514.91.1.111


Malle, B. F. (2006). The actor-observer asymmetry in attribution: A (surprising) meta-analysis.

       Psychological Bulletin, 132, 895-919. doi:10.1037/0033-2909.132.6.895


Mehl, M. R. (2006). The lay assessment of subclinical depression in daily life. Psychological

       Assessment, 18, 340-345. doi:10.1037/1040-3590.18.3.340


Mehl, M. R., & Holleran, S. E. (2007). An empirical analysis of the obtrusiveness of and

       participants' compliance with the electronically activated recorder (EAR). European

       Journal of Psychological Assessment, 23, 248-257. doi:10.1027/1015-5759.23.4.248


Mehl, M. R., Gosling, S. D., & Pennebaker, J. W. (2006). Personality in its natural habitat:

       Manifestations and implicit folk theories of personality in daily life. Journal of

       Personality and Social Psychology, 90, 862-877. doi:10.1037/0022-3514.90.5.862


Mehl, M. R., & Pennebaker, J. W. (2003). The sounds of social life: A psychometric analysis of

       students' daily social environments and natural conversations. Journal of Personality and

       Social Psychology, 84, 857-870. doi:10.1037/0022-3514.84.4.857


Mehl, M. R., Pennebaker, J. W., Crow, D. M., Dabbs, J., & Price, J. H. (2001). The

       Electronically Activated Recorded (EAR): A device for sampling naturalistic daily

       activities and conversations. Behavior Research Methods, Instruments & Computers, 33,

       517-523. doi:10.3758/BF03195410
                                                                           Validity by Source 39


Mehl, M. R., & Robbins, M. L. (2012). Naturalistic observation sampling: The Electronically

       Activated Recorder (EAR). In M. R. Mehl, T. S. Conner, M. R. Mehl, T. S. Conner

       (Eds.), Handbook of research methods for studying daily life (pp. 176-192). New York,

       NY, US: Guilford Press.


Mehl, M. R., Vazire, S., Holleran, S. E., & Clark, C. S. (2010). Eavesdropping on happiness:

       Well-being is related to having less small talk and more substantive conversations.

       Psychological Science, 21, 539-541. doi:10.1177/0956797610362675


Mehl, M. R., Vazire, S., Ramírez-Esparza, N., Slatcher, R. B., & Pennebaker, J. W. (2007). Are

       women really more talkative than men? Science, 317 (5834), 82.

       doi:10.1126/science.1139940


Naumann, L. P., Vazire, S., Rentfrow, P. J., & Gosling, S. D. (2009). Personality judgments

       based on physical appearance. Personality and Social Psychology Bulletin, 35, 1661-

       1671. doi:10.1177/0146167209346309


Norman, W. T., & Goldberg, L. R. (1966). Raters, ratees, and randomness in personality

       structure. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 4, 681-691.

       doi:10.1037/h0024002


Ozer, D. J., & Benet-Martínez, V. (2006). Personality and the prediction of consequential

       outcomes. Annual Review of Psychology, 57, 401-421.

       doi:10.1146/annurev.psych.57.102904.190127


Paulhus, D. L. (1984). Two-component models of socially desirable responding. Journal of

       Personality and Social Psychology, 46, 598-609. doi:10.1037/0022-3514.46.3.598
                                                                             Validity by Source 40


Paulhus, D. L., & John, O. P. (1998). Egoistic and moralistic biases in self-perception: The

       interplay of self-deceptive styles with basic traits and motives. Journal of Personality, 66,

       1025-1060. doi:10.1111/1467-6494.00041


Paulhus, D. L., & Vazire, S. (2007). The self-report method. In R. W. Robins, R. C. Fraley, R. F.

       Krueger, R. W. Robins, R. C. Fraley, R. F. Krueger (Eds.) , Handbook of research

       methods in personality psychology (pp. 224-239). New York, NY, US: Guilford Press.


Ramírez-Esparza, N., Mehl, M. R., Álvarez-Bermúdez, J., & Pennebaker, J. W. (2009). Are

       Mexicans more or less sociable than Americans? Insights from a naturalistic observation

       study. Journal of Research in Personality, 43, 1-7. doi:10.1016/j.jrp.2008.09.002


Rauthmann, J. F., Gallardo-Pujol, D., Guillaume, E. M., Todd, E., Nave, C. S., Sherman, R. A.,

       & Funder, D. C. (2014). The Situational Eight DIAMONDS: A taxonomy of major

       dimensions of situation characteristics. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology,

       107, 677-718. doi:10.1037/a0037250


Robbins, M. L., Focella, E. S., Kasle, S., López, A. M., Weihs, K. L., & Mehl, M. R. (2011).

       Naturalistically observed swearing, emotional support, and depressive symptoms in

       women coping with illness. Health Psychology, 30, 789-792. doi:10.1037/a0023431


Robins, R. W., Spranca, M. D., & Mendelsohn, G. A. (1996). The actor-observer effect revisited:

       Effects of individual differences and repeated social interactions on actor and observer

       attributions. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 71, 375-389.

       doi:10.1037/0022-3514.71.2.375
                                                                             Validity by Source 41


Schönbrodt, F. D., & Perugini, M. (2013). At what sample size do correlations stabilize? Journal

       of Research in Personality, 47, 609-612. doi:10.1016/j.jrp.2013.05.009


Sherman, R. A., Nave, C. S., & Funder, D. C. (2010). Situational similarity and personality

       predict behavioral consistency. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 99, 330-

       343. doi:10.1037/a0019796


Slatcher, R. B., & Robles, T. F. (2012). Preschoolers' everyday conflict at home and diurnal

       cortisol patterns. Health Psychology, 31, 834-838. doi:10.1037/a0026774


Slatcher, R. B., & Trentacosta, C. J. (2011). A naturalistic observation study of the links between

       parental depressive symptoms and preschoolers' behaviors in everyday life. Journal of

       Family Psychology, 25, 444-448. doi:10.1037/a0023728


Taylor, S. E., & Brown, J. D. (1988). Illusion and well-being: A social psychological perspective

       on mental health. Psychological Bulletin, 103, 193-210. doi:10.1037/0033-

       2909.103.2.193


Vazire, S. (2006). Informant reports: A cheap, fast, and easy method for personality assessment.

       Journal of Research in Personality, 40, 472-481. doi:10.1016/j.jrp.2005.03.003


Vazire, S. (2010). Who knows what about a person? The self–other knowledge asymmetry

       (SOKA) model. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 98, 281-300.

       doi:10.1037/a0017908


Vazire, S., & Mehl, M. R. (2008). Knowing me, knowing you: The accuracy and unique

       predictive validity of self-ratings and other-ratings of daily behavior. Journal of

       Personality and Social Psychology, 95, 1202-1216. doi:10.1037/a0013314
                                                                              Validity by Source 42


Vazire, S., & Solomon, B. C. (2015). Self- and other-knowledge of personality. In M.

       Mikulincer, P. R. Shaver, M. L. Cooper, & R. J. Larsen (Eds.) Handbook of Personality

       Processes and Individual Differences (pp. 261-281). Washington, DC: American

       Psychological Association.


Vazire, S., & Wilson, T. D. (2012). Handbook of Self-Knowledge. New York, NY: Guilford

       Press.


Watson, D. (1982). The actor and the observer: How are their perceptions of causality divergent?

       Psychological Bulletin, 92, 682-700. doi:10.1037/0033-2909.92.3.682


Watson, D. (1989). Strangers' ratings of the five robust personality factors: Evidence of a

       surprising convergence with self-report. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology,

       57, 120-128. doi:10.1037/0022-3514.57.1.120


Watson, D., Hubbard, B., & Wiese, D. (2000). Self–other agreement in personality and

       affectivity: The role of acquaintanceship, trait visibility, and assumed similarity. Journal

       of Personality and Social Psychology, 78, 546-558. doi:10.1037/0022-3514.78.3.546


Wilson, R. E., & Vazire, S. (2015). Taking personality to the next level: What does it mean to

       know a person? In R. A. Scott and S. M. Kosslyn (Eds.) Emerging Trends in the Social

       and Behavioral Sciences: An Interdisciplinary, Searchable, and Linkable Resource (pp.

       1-13). DOI: 10.1002/9781118900772.etrds0327


Wood, D., & Wortman, J. (2012). Trait means and desirabilities as artifactual and real sources of

       differential stability of personality traits. Journal of Personality, 80, 665-701.

       doi:10.1111/j.1467-6494.2011.00740.x
Validity by Source 43
                                                                             Validity by Source 44

                                             Footnotes
1
 One exception to this practice was sleep. Because sleep instances were excluded from the total
usable file count, the denominator for the time-use percentage in this case was the total number
of files (as opposed to usable files).
2
 Paricipants were also asked to keep a very brief standardized diary (spreadsheets with one-hour
blocks as rows), in which they accounted for their general activities during hour-long blocks
(e.g., at work, in class). An additional column of the diary allowed participants to indicate
whether they were wearing the EAR during a given time period.
3
 Fear and disgust occurred so infrequently in this sample (present in 1 and 4 files, respectively)
that we excluded them from analysis.
                                                                           Validity by Source 45

Table 1

Trait-Specific Hypotheses

______________________________________________________________________________

Variable             Observability        Evaluativeness           Prediction

______________________________________________________________________________

Neuroticism              Low                    Low                 Self > Informant > Stranger

Extraversion             High                   Low                 Self = Informant = Stranger

Openness                 Low                   High                 Informant > Self > Stranger

Agreeableness          Moderate              Moderate               Informant > Self > Stranger

Conscientiousness      Moderate              Moderate               Informant > Self > Stranger

______________________________________________________________________________
Note. Categorization of traits as high or low in observability and evaluativeness is based on the
results in Robins and John (1993).
                                                                         Validity by Source 46

Table 2

EAR Descriptive Statistics

______________________________________________________________________________

                        Inter-coder    At Least           Base Rate Time Usage %

Behavior                 Reliability   Once (N)   Minimum      Maximum      Mean        SD

______________________________________________________________________________

Talking

Overall                  .89 (.97)         87       6.2           59.1       30.0       12.1

With 1 person            .63 (.90)         87       0.8           45.2       16.7         9.7

With group               .61 (.89)         81       0.0           21.8        6.7         5.6

On phone                 .89 (.98)         78       0.0           32.2        4.3         4.6

With romantic partner    .06 (.24)         31       0.0           36.5        3.6         7.6

With child               .66 (.91)         17       0.0           26.5        1.3         4.1

With other family        .02 (.10)         39       0.0           22.7        2.3         4.5

With friend              .71 (.92)         86       0.0           42.6       17.0       11.0

With stranger            .64 (.90)         37       0.0           29.4        1.2         3.7

To pet                  --                 12       0.0            4.0        0.2         0.7



Activities

Socializing              .72 (.93)         63       0.0           54.6       12.2       14.4

In class                 .87 (.97)         86       0.0           31.9       15.5         5.9

On computer              .50 (.84)         54       0.0           24.5        2.6         4.6

Working                  .82 (.96)         29       0.0           49.7        6.3       11.1

Eating                   .12 (.42)         53       0.0            8.6        1.5         1.8

TV on                    .79 (.95)         87       0.7           72.7       28.6       15.5
                                                       Validity by Source 47

Sleeping                .39 (.77)   69    0.0   33.3        8.4         8.1

Studying                .19 (.54)   53    0.0   35.9        4.5         6.9

Music on                .86 (.97)   86    0.0   41.8       14.8         9.2

Arguing                 .33 (.71)   17    0.0    5.6        0.3         0.1

Swearing                .57 (.80)   26    0.0    5.7        1.1         1.5

Substance use           .25 (.62)   14    0.0    7.9        0.3         1.2

Laughing                .57 (.87)   81    0.0   19.9        5.2         3.8

Singing                 .73 (.93)   62    0.0   10.7        1.7         2.0

Crying                 --            4    0.0    1.6        0.0         0.2

Sighing                 .14 (.44)   49    0.0    3.6        0.7         0.9

Coughing                .45 (.80)   45    0.0    9.4        0.9         1.4



Location

Apartment               .66 (.91)   87    0.7   77.1       46.7       15.8

Outdoors                .46 (.81)   62    0.0   26.5        3.2         4.5

In public               .73 (.93)   87   13.2   67.2       38.7       13.8

In transit              .77 (.94)   87    3.5   43.5       14.3         7.1



Type of Conversation

Small talk              .26 (.63)   83    0.0   25.5        6.4         6.2

Deep conversation      --           40    0.0   19.6        1.0         2.4

Personal                .44 (.80)   60    0.0   13.5        2.1         2.8

Gossip                  .24 (.62)   72    0.0   13.8        3.1         3.0

Practical               .62 (.89)   86    0.0   43.5       15.6         9.7

Emotions
                                                                            Validity by Source 48

Happiness                .22 (.59)           49        0.0          13.5          2.6         3.7

Anger                    .22 (.59)           31        0.0          11.6          0.7         1.6

Fear                    --                    1        0.0            1.4         0.0         0.1

Surprise                 .00                 17        0.0            2.3         0.2         0.4

Disgust                 --                    4        0.0            1.5         0.0         0.2



Big Five Behaviors

Dominance                .23 (.60)           30        0.0            6.1         0.6         1.1

Affiliation             --                    3        0.0            6.6         0.1         0.7

Energy                   .04 (.16)           22        0.0          14.0          0.6         1.8

Sympathy                 .83 (.96)           12        0.0            1.6         0.1         0.3

Concern for others       .35 (.73)           30        0.0            3.1         0.4         0.7

Affection               --                   17        0.0            6.5         0.3         1.0

Complaining              .14 (.45)           49        0.0            5.2         1.0         1.0

Worrying                 .10 (.36)           14        0.0            2.7         0.2         0.5

Sadness                  .58 (.88)            8        0.0            1.0         0.1         0.2

Cleaning                --                   39        0.0          20.6          1.3         2.9

Hygiene                  .57 (.87)           55        0.0            5.0         1.0         1.2

Responsibility          --                   26        0.0            4.8         0.4         0.9

Spirituality            --                   10        0.0            2.9         0.1         0.4

Creativity              --                    5        0.0            3.6         0.1         0.6

Unconventionality       --                    5        0.0            1.4         0.1         0.2

______________________________________________________________________________
Note. N = 83. Reliability = ICC (2, 1); ICC (2,k) in parentheses. If at least three raters had zero
occurrences logged in the training files, we did not calculate reliability (--). At Least Once =
number of participants for whom this behavior was coded at least one time during the
observation period.
                                                                                            Validity by Source 50

Table 3

Descriptive Statistics for Target (Self-Reported), Informant, and Stranger Ratings

______________________________________________________________________________

                              Self                             Informant                          Stranger

                         Mean        SD                       Mean    SD                     Mean        SD

                                            dself-informant                dinformant-stranger                dstranger-self

______________________________________________________________________________

Neuroticism              21.32       6.90      -.10           22.04   7.04       .17             21.11   2.98      -.04

Extraversion             27.99       7.30      -.36           30.37   5.99       .80             26.10   4.57      -.31

Openness                 36.31       6.36      -.27           37.94   5.83       .85             33.75   3.81      -.49

Agreeableness            36.27       5.11       .08           35.82   5.66      -.02             35.92   3.40      -.08

Conscientiousness        34.56       5.08      -.19           35.53   5.65       .23             34.45   3.32      -.03

______________________________________________________________________________

Note. N = 110 (Self), 86 (Informant), 109 (Stranger). Italicized numbers are Cohen’s d, with the
direction of the difference indicated by the order of the source (e.g., dself-informant denotes the effect
size when subtracting the informant estimate from the self estimate for the given trait).
                                                                              Validity by Source 51

Table 4

Multitrait-Multimethod Matrix of Personality Judgments

______________________________________________________________________________

                       Self                        Informant                          Stranger

           N      E     O     A     C     N       E    O      A    C      N       E      O       A   C

______________________________________________________________________________

Self

N         (.87)

E         -.30 (.91)

O         -.17 .25 (.81)

A         -.49 .21      .00 (.77)

C         -.27 .14 -.01 .27 (.75)

Informant

N          .50 -.04 -.05 -.33 -.16        (.90)

E         -.17 .67      .03 .15     .09   -.02 (.86)

O         -.05 .20      .51 -.08 -.09     -.23    .23 (.83)

A         -.30 -.03 -.23 .34 -.02         -.59    .11 .16 (.83)

C         -.11 -.15 -.23 .03        .32   -.48 -.02 .27       .41 (.84)

Stranger

N          .22 -.11 -.13 -.17 -.03        .19 -.11 -.09 -.07 .06          (.87)

E         -.17 .29      .11 .24     .10   -.06    .34 .17     .00 -.02    -.55 (.94)

O          .08 -.02     .29 -.02 -.09     .08 -.03 .15 -.15 -.20          -.31 .19 (.87)

A         -.06 -.02     .01 .21 -.15      .04     .19 .00     .13 -.13    -.49 .31       .30 (.91)

C         -.06 -.13     .05 .06     .07   -.01    .00 -.05    .02 .02     -.30 .11       .24 .36 (.90)

______________________________________________________________________________
                                                                          Validity by Source 52


Note. Ns vary depending upon sources. For Self, Informant, and Stranger intercorrelations, Ns
are 110, 86, and 109, respectively. Self-Informant N was 85; Self-Stranger N was 107;
Informant-Stranger N was 88. Correlations greater than .20 are in bold; convergent relations are
underlined. Coefficient Alpha appears in parentheses. N = Neuroticism, E = Extraversion, O =
Openness to Experience, A = Agreeableness, C = Conscientiousness.
                                                                                 Validity by Source 53

Table 5

Correlations between Ratings of Extraversion and Relevant Acoustically-Captured Behavior

______________________________________________________________________________

Predictor                Self                 Informant                             Stranger

                                       Aggregate        Single             Aggregate           Single

______________________________________________________________________________

Talking

1 Other            .06 [-.16, .27]    .29 [.06, .49] .27 [.04, .48]     -.10 [-.31, .12] -.08 [-.29, .04]

Group              .01 [-.21, .22] -.05 [-.28, .19] -.06 [-.28, .19]    .24 [.03, .43]    .18 [-.04, .38]

Friend             .24 [.02, .43]     .30 [.07, .50] .28 [.05, .49]     .27 [.06, .46]    .20 [-.02, .40]

Partner            -.19 [-.39, .03] -.15 [-.37, .09] -.12 [-.35, .11] -.23 [-.42, -.01] -.17 [-.37, .05]

Location

In Transit         .14 [-.08, .34]    .30 [.07, .50] .28 [.04, .48]     .21 [-.01, .40] .15 [-.07, .35]

In Public          -.03 [-.24, .19] -.06 [-.29, .18] -.09 [-.32, .15]   .14 [-.07, .35] .11 [-.11, .32]

Activities

Socializing        -.04 [-.26, .18]   .04 [-.20, .27] .04 [-.20, .27]   .17 [-.05, .37] .12 [-.10, .33]

Music              .09 [-.13, .30]    .18 [-.06, .40] .12 [-.12, .35]   .28 [.07, .46]    .20 [-.02, .40]

Laughing           .22 [.00, .41]     .16 [-.08, 38] .14 [-.10, .37]    .23 [.01, .42]    .17 [-.05, .37]

Singing            .21 [-.01, .41]    .13 [-.11, .36] .08 [-.16, .32]   .11 [-.11, .31] .08 [-.29, .04]

Type of Conversation

Gossip             .20 [-.01, .40]    .21 [-.02, .43] .19 [-.04, .42]   .05 [-.16, .26] .04 [-.18, .25]

Practical          .21 [.00, .41]     .23 [.00, .45] .22 [-.03, .43] -.02 [-.24, .19] -.02 [-.23, .20]

Emotion

Happiness          .17 [-.05, .37]    .08 [-.16, .31] .08 [-.16, .31]   .39 [.19, .56]    .28 [.07, .47]

Big Five Aspects
                                                                              Validity by Source 54

Affiliation       .15 [-.06, .36]   .19 [-.04, .41] .21 [-.04, .42]   .24 [.03, .43]   .17 [-.05, .37]

Energy            .21 [-.01, .40]   .23 [-.01, .44] .20 [-.05, .41]   .22 [.01, .41]   .16 [-.06, .36]

______________________________________________________________________________

Note. N = 83 (Self), 69 (Informant), 83 (Stranger). Values in brackets represent lower and upper
bounds of 95% confidence intervals. Correlations stronger than |.20| appear in bold.
                                                                                Validity by Source 55

Table 6

Correlations between Ratings of Neuroticism and Relevant Acoustically-Captured Behavior

______________________________________________________________________________

Predictor                Self                 Informant                            Stranger

                                       Aggregate        Single            Aggregate           Single

______________________________________________________________________________

Location

Apartment          .06 [-.15, .28]    .23 [-.01, .44] .19 [-.05, .41]   .07 [-.14, .28] .05 [-.17, .26]

In Public          -.03 [-.25, .19] -.22 [-.43, .02] -.22 [-.45, .00] -.07 [-.28, .15] -.05 [-.26, .17]

Activities

Working            -.14 [-.34, .08] -.27 [-.48, -.04]-.21 [-.45, .00]   .00 [-.22, .21] .00 [-.22, .22]

Sleeping           .13 [-.09, .33]    .22 [-.02, .43] .22 [-.04, .41] -.02 [-.24, .19] -.01 [-.23, .21]

Crying             .14 [-.08, .35]    .19 [-.05, .41] .20 [-.04, .41] -.05 [-.26, .16] -.05 [-.26, .17]

Coughing           .15 [-.07, .35]    .20 [-.04, .42] .15 [-.09, .37]   .05 [-.15, .28] .05 [-.17, .26]

Sighing            .09 [-.13, .30]    .11 [-.13, .33] .19 [-.06, .40]   .02 [-.19, .23] .02 [-.20, .23]

Emotion

Sadness            .06 [-.15, .28]    .18 [-.06, .40] .22 [-.02, .43] -.13 [-.33, .09] -.09 [-.30, .13]

Anger              -.06 [-.27, .15]   .19 [-.05, .41] .13 [-.11, .36]   .17 [-.05, .37] .12 [-.10, .33]

Big Five Aspects

Worrying           .10 [-.23, .20]    .15 [-.09, .37] .17 [-.08, .38] -.09 [-.30, .13] -.07 [-.28, .15]

Complaining        -.02 [-.12, .31]   .18 [-.06, .40] .12 [-.13, .33]   .00 [-.22, .21] -.01 [-.23, .21]

______________________________________________________________________________

Note. N = 83 (Self), 69 (Informant), 84 (Stranger). Values in brackets represent lower and upper
bounds of 95% confidence intervals. Correlations stronger than |.20| appear in bold.
                                                                                Validity by Source 56

Table 7

Correlations between Ratings of Conscientiousness and Relevant Acoustically-Captured
Behavior

______________________________________________________________________________

Predictor                Self                 Informant                            Stranger

                                       Aggregate        Single            Aggregate           Single

______________________________________________________________________________

Activities

In Class           .10 [-.12, .30] -.02 [-.26, .22] -.07 [-.30, .17]    .31 [.10, .49]   .21 [-.01, .41]

Computer           -.26 [-.45, -.04] -.11 [-.34, .13] -.08 [-.31, .16] -.09 [-.30, .12] -.07 [-.28, .15]

Sleeping           -.02 [-.23, .20] -.23 [-.45, .01] -.22 [-.43, .02] -.27 [-.46, -.06] -.18 [-.38, .04]

Studying           .21 [.00, .41]     .09 [-.15, .32] .10 [-.14, .33]   .04 [-.17, .25] .03 [-.19, .24]

Swearing           -.25 [-.49, .03]   .13 [-.18, .41] .23 [-.08, .50] -.41 [-.62, -.15] -.31 [-.49, -.10]

Substance Use      .02 [-.20, .23]    .07 [-.17, .31] .07 [-.17, .31]   .01 [-.21, .22] .01 [-.21, .23]

TV on              -.09 [-.30, .12] -.15 [-.38, .09] -.10 [-.33, .14] -.12 [-.32, .10] -.08 [-.29, .14]

Working            -.01 [-.22, .21]   .05 [-.19, .29] .10 [-.14, .33]   .07 [-.15, .28] .04 [-.18, .25]

Type of Conversation

Gossip             -.20 [-.40, .02] -.08 [-.31, .16] -.06 [-.29, .18] -.07 [-.29, .15] -.04 [-.25, .18]

Big Five Aspects

Cleaning           -.06 [-.27, .16]   .01 [-.23, .25] .04 [-.20, .28] -.16 [-.36, .06] -.11 [-.32, .11]

Hygiene            .12 [-.10, .33]    .14 [-.10, .37] .09 [-.15, .32]   .03 [-.19, .24] .01 [-.21, .23]

Responsibility     .15 [-.07, .35]    .02 [-.22, .26] .02 [-.22, .25]   .03 [-.19, .24] .02 [-.20, .23]

______________________________________________________________________________

Note. N = 83 (Self), 68 (Informant), 84 (Stranger). Ns for Swearing are only 50 (for self- and
stranger-ratings) and 42 (for informant-ratings) because two coders failed to register the
category. Values in brackets represent lower and upper bounds of 95% confidence intervals.
Correlations stronger than |.20| appear in bold.
                                                                                Validity by Source 57

Table 8

Correlations between Ratings of Agreeableness and Relevant Acoustically-Captured Behavior

______________________________________________________________________________

Predictor                Self                 Informant                            Stranger

                                       Aggregate        Single            Aggregate           Single

______________________________________________________________________________

Talking

Partner            -.09 [-.30, .12] -.14 [-.37, .10] .02 [-.22, .26] -.06 [-.27, .16] -.03 [-.24, .19]

Family             .07 [-.15, .28]    .17 [-.07, .39] .15 [-.08, .38]   .16 [-.05, .37] .12 [-.10, .33]

Emotion

Anger              .11 [-.11, .32]    .02 [-.21, .26] .04 [-.20, .27] -.06 [-.27, .15] -.04 [-.25, .18]

Big Five Aspects

Sympathy           .03 [-.19, .24] -.03 [-.27, .20] -.05 [-.28, .19]    .02 [-.19, .23] .02 [-.20, .23]

Concern            .17 [-.04, .37]    .11 [-.13, .34] .16 [-.07, .39]   .17 [-.04, .37] .13 [-.09, .34]

Affection          -.07 [-.28, .14]   .02 [-.22, .26] .05 [-.19, .29] -.03 [-.25, .18] -.01 [-.23, .21]

______________________________________________________________________________

Note. N = 84 (Self), 69 (Informant), 84 (Stranger). Values in brackets represent lower and upper
bounds of 95% confidence intervals. Correlations stronger than |.20| appear in bold.
                                                                               Validity by Source 58

Table 9

Correlations between Ratings of Openness to Experience and Relevant Acoustically-Captured
Behavior

______________________________________________________________________________

Predictor               Self                 Informant                            Stranger

                                      Aggregate        Single            Aggregate           Single

______________________________________________________________________________

Activities

Substance Use      .06 [-.16, .27]   .22 [-.02, .44] .21 [-.04, .43]   .21 [.00, .41]   .15 [-.07, .35]

Type of Conversation

Deep               .11 [-.11, .31] -.12 [-.36, .12] -.14 [-.37, .10]   .12 [-.10, .32] .08 [-.14, .29]

Big Five Aspects

Creativity         .22 [.01, .41]    .17 [-.07, .40] .16 [-.09, .39] -.04 [-.25, .18] -.03 [-.24, .19]

Unconventionality .03 [-.19, .24]    .18 [-.07, .41] .24 [.00, .46]    .05 [-.17, .26] .03 [-.19, .24]

______________________________________________________________________________

Note. N = 83 (Self), 65 (Informant), 84 (Stranger). Values in brackets represent lower and upper
bounds of 95% confidence intervals. Correlations stronger than |.20| appear in bold.
                                        Validity by Source 59

Figure 1

Conceptual Map of Big Five Dimensions
                                                                          Validity by Source 60

                                          Appendix

                      Upstate EAR Coding Categories
General
EAR                   1 = Subject is talking about the EAR or the study
Interesting           1 = Sound file seems interesting to you.
Noise                 1 = High noise or interference.
Problem               No entry = everything ok; 1= insufficient acoustic information or
                      silence); 2 = bad recording quality.
Talking               1 = Subject is talking; includes non-fluencies. Talking to herself would
                      be ‘with others’ = 0; when subject is on the phone, mark this category.
With 1 other          1 = Subject is with only one other person: dyadic interaction.
With Group            1 = Subject is with a group of people--more than one other person).
On the Phone          1 = Subject is on the phone.
Friend/Acquaintance   1 = Subject is talking to platonic friend or acquaintance.
Partner               1 = Subject is talking to romantic partner (spouse, boyfriend or
                      girlfriend).
Other Family/         1 = Subject is with other family members. When in doubt mark
Relative              "friend/acquaintance."
Laughing              1 = Subject laughing.
Singing               1 = Subject is singing or whistling.
Crying                1 = Subject crying.
Mad/Arguing           1 = Subject is arguing with, yelling at, screaming at, shouting at, mad at
                      another person. You detect any anger in voice (can be frustration).
Sighing               1 = Subject is sighing: an exaggerated exhalation of breath.
Coughing/Sneezing     1 = Any sign of illness; coughing, sneezing, sniffing, or any acoustic
                      sign of health problems.
                      This does not include complaints about or references to physical
                      symptoms.
Socializing           1 = Subject is socializing or hanging out with others (e.g. watching a
                      movie with other people).
In class              1 = Subject is in class.
Computer              1 = Subject is working on the computer (may hear typing or clicking).
Working               1 = Subject is working (e.g. in an office, retail business).
Church                1 = Subject is attending a service, at a bible study group, choir practice,
                      etc.
Eat/Drink             1 = Subject is eating or drinking.
TV                    1 = TV is on, irrespective of whether it is just playing in the background
                      or subject is engaged in watching a movie.
Sleeping              1 = Subject is sleeping--can infer if you hear nothing else, and it is at
                      night or very early in the morning.
Studying              1 = Subject reports studying in the diary or is overheard studying audibly
                      with someone else. You might also hear pages turning.
                                                                           Validity by Source 61


Radio / Music          1 = There is some music or radio in the background. It is not important
                       whether the subject is only listening to music. Live music at a concert or
                       party counts. Music from a movie or TV does not.
Substance              1 = Either discussion of or suspicion of substance use or abuse; includes
Use/Abuse              any present party referring to drugs or alcohol or the participant
                       behaving in a manner which suggests intoxication.
Apartment / Home       1 = Subject is at home or at someone else’s house.
Outdoors               1 = Subject is outdoors, defined as subject is able to see the sky. Driving
                       in a car or bus would NOT be considered as outdoors.
In Public              1 = Subject is in any other public place (wherein they may be observed
                       by or observe others).
In Transit             1 = Subject is in transit (e.g., in a car, bus, or is walking).

Unknown               1 = Cannot determine location.
           Conversation Type: mark "1" for all that apply in any given audio file)
Practical             Participant is talking about practical everyday things. The information
                      exchanged serves a pragmatic purpose in the participant’s everyday life.
                      Can include making plans, discussing what is for dinner, picking up kids,
                      travel arrangements.
                      e.g. "We need parmesan cheese for our dinner tonight"; "I will pick up
                      Sally on Monday and Wednesdays at 5".
Small Talk            The purpose of this interaction is completely non-instrumental. No (or
                      very trivial) information is exchanged; everything would be the same if
                      the conversation never happened.
                      e.g. “how’s the weather?” “I stepped on something” “What are you up
                      to?”
Deep/Substantive      Any conversation that has the purpose to exchange thoughts,
Conversation          information, values, ideas about a (non-emotional) topic; it could be
                      about news of the day, about political issues, philosophical topics,
                      theoretical ideas; information only.
                      The conversation does not really have to be “deep” but must have
                      “substance.”
                      e.g., “Aren’t Muslims not supposed to drink alcohol?”; “you heard that
                      the WTC was attacked?”; “I found this book interesting.”; “Guns n’
                      Roses has a real rock n’ roll sound to them.”
Personal / Emotional Participant sharing of own personal feelings or emotions. Can include
Disclosure            talking about their or a parent’s divorce and their hopes and dreams for
                      the future. The conversation passes a threshold of being trivial for the
                      participant).
                      e.g., “I feel so terrible”; “I am scared about my grades in class”; “I have
                      a crush on X”
                      There are not accusatory statements, such as “It pisses me off when you
                      talk with other women at parties.” This constitutes complaining.
Gossip                Participant is talking (e.g., divulging personal information) about another
                      person while they are not there. Spreading rumor / reputational
                                                                            Validity by Source 62


                      information about another person in their absence. This does not have to
                      be negative.
                      e.g "X talked back and that’s why he was fired"; "Did you hear about
                      their break-up?"; “Frank is so silly sometimes”; “Did you hear the lead
                      singer of Gun n’ Roses is dating X?”
                   FFM-Relevant Behaviors (mark 1 if any occur in a file)
Dominance               Any command given to another person; any attempt to control another
                       person's behavior; any statement about influencing others
Affiliation            Any statement of group membership or mention of a group to which the
                       subject belongs.
Energy                  Excited or anticipatory speech (e.g., "let's go!" or "I'm excited/ready");
                       any verbal or nonverbal behavior that indicates active engagement.
Sympathy               Verbal or nonverbal behavior indicating that the subject feels with or for
                       someone else--could be a knowing sigh or "awwhh, that's tough" type
                       statement.
Concern for Others     A sincere inquiry about the well-being of another person (e.g., "how's
                       your grandmother doing?" or a non-routine "how are you?"). Also, any
                       helping behavior goes here.
Affection              Participant expresses admiration or love for living beings (not only for
                       romantic partner). Can be a compliment or using pet names. Not a
                       backhanded compliment or sarcastic display of affection. Participant is
                       being sincere beyond a social script.
                       e.g. "You are beautiful"; "I love you"; "Felix is a fun cat"; "I love your
                       cooking.”
Complaining/           Participant blames someone or something, complains, whines (not
Whining                constructive criticism).
                       e.g. “I hate the wind”; "Why do I have to be here?"; "That's a dumb
                       idea."
Worry/Anxiety          Participant states concern of upcoming events (e.g., "I'm nervous about
                       my Biology exam") or sounds tense or nervous when discussing an
                       event.
Sadness/Melancholy     Will often coincide with the Sadness emotion category, this category
                       may also involve discussion of past sadness.
Cleaning/Organizing    Subject is sweeping, picking up objects, making the bed, folding clothes,
                       cooking, doing the dishes, house maintenance issues.
Hygiene                Subject is brushing teeth, taking a shower, or washing hands. Any
                       personal maintenance behavior.
Tending to             Subject is paying bills or making systematic plans to accomplish either
Responsibilities       proximal or distal goals.
Spirituality           Participant is talking about a spiritual or religious topic--not "Karma's a
                       B****" or "Oh my god."
                       Important: could be any religion or notion of god. And not church
                       discussion (coded elsewhere).
                       e.g. soul, universe, afterlife, karma, God, or lack thereof.
Creativity             Subject is participating in creative pursuits (e.g., making music) or
                                                                           Validity by Source 63


                     discussing creative pursuits (e.g., art, literature)
Unconventionality    Participant discusses his or her uniqueness in some domain "I only use
                     my left hand to eat") or desires to do something "out of the norm.”
                     Examples of the latter could range from expressing a desire to teach
                     overseas or travel aimlessly to skydiving. The point is that the person is
                     setting him or herself and his or her actions apart from others.
Emotions (mark "1" if subject displays any of these emotions in a given audio file)
Happiness              Any verbal or nonverbal display of happiness. You may mark this
                       category if you have already marked laughing, but statements of
                       happiness also apply.
Sadness                Any verbal or nonverbal display of sadness. Mark this category if you
                       have already marked crying, but statements of sadness also apply.
                       *ended up merging with sadness/melancholy*
Anger/Frustration      Any verbal or nonverbal display of anger or frustration, e.g., angry
                       exclamations, growl-like utterances
Fear                   Any verbal or nonverbal display of fear (e.g., "I'm scared" or a shriek).
Surprise               Any verbal or nonverbal display of surprise (e.g., "wow" or a sudden
                       excited noise).
Disgust                Any verbal or nonverbal display of disgust (e.g., "that's gross" or "yuck!"
                       or "eww").
                                                                            Validity by Source 64




                                           Highlights

We coded naturally occurring behavior in everyday life.

Self and informant ratings of Big Five traits predicted many relevant behaviors.

Stranger ratings of Extraversion predicted relevant behavior.

Predictions derived from the Self-Other Knowledge Asymmetry model were partially supported.
