Journal of Personality and Social Psychology
1982, Vol. 42, No. 1, 116-131

Copyright 1982 by the American Psychological Association, Inc.
0022-3514/82/4201-0116$00.75

The Need for Cognition
John T. Cacioppo

Richard E. Petty

University of Iowa

University of Missouri—Columbia

Four studies are reported in which a scale to assess the need for cognition (i.e.,
the tendency for an individual to engage in and enjoy thinking) was developed
and validated. In Study 1 a pool of items was administered to groups known to
differ in need for cognition. Members of a university faculty served as subjects
in the high-need-for-cognition group, whereas assembly line workers served as
subjects in the low-need-for-cognition group. The criteria of ambiguity, irrelevance, and internal consistency were used to select the items for subsequent
studies. A factor analysis was performed on the selected items and yielded one
major factor. In 'Study 2 the scale was administered to a more homogeneous
population (400 undergraduates) to validate the factor structure obtained in
Study 1 and to determine whether the scale tapped a construct distinct from test
anxiety and cognitive style. The factor structure was replicated in Study 2,
responses to the need for cognition scale were predictably and weakly related
to cognitive style, and responses were unrelated,to test anxiety. In Study 3, 104
subjects completed need for cognition, social desirability, and dogmatism scales
and indicated what their American College Test scores were. Results indicated
that need for cognition was related weakly and negatively to being close minded,
unrelated to social desirability, and positively correlated with general intelligence.
Study 4 replicated the major findings of Study 3 and furnished evidence of thj
predictive validity of the Need for Cognition Scale: Attitudes toward simple an
complex versions of a cognitive task appeared indistinguishable until the subjects'
need for cognition was considered. The theoretical utility of the construct and
measure of need for cognition are discussed.

Studies of cognition have tended to focus
on two issues: the nature of knowledge and
the character of the underlying processes
that enable the acquisition and use of this
knowledge (e.g., Blumenthal, 1977; Wyer
& Carlston, 1979). In this study we proposed
to investigate a related phenomenon. We
sought to identify differences among individuals in their tendency to engage in and

enjoy thinking. The notion of such a disposition emerged fairly early in the history of
personality and social psychology (e.g., Asch,
1952;Maslow, 1943; Murphy, 1947;Sarnoff
& Katz, 1954) and was developed most eloquently in the experiments on the "need for
cognition" by Cohen, Stotland, and Wolfe
(1955) and by Cohen (1957).'
The "Need" for Cognition

The research was supported by University Faculty

.

,

Scholar Award A240.
We are indebted to Charlotte Lowell for her assistance in the first study, John Mueller and Martin Heesacker for their assistance in the second study, and Claudia French for her aid in the third and fourth studies.

Cohen et al. (1955) described the need for
cognition as "a need to structure relevant
situations in meaningful, integrated ways. It

We also wish to thank William Robinson, Richard
McCard, Robert Jones, and Bill Davis for providing
access to their employees for the first study. Finally, we
thank Gertrude Math for her comments on an earlier
draft of this article.
Requests for reprints should be addressed to John T.
Cacioppo, Department of Psychology, University of
Iowa, Iowa City, Iowa 52242, or to Richard E. Petty,
Department of Psychology, University of Missouri, Columbia, Missouri 65211.

' The Cohen, Stotland, and Wolfe (1955) and Cohen
(1957) studies are, to our knowledge, the only published
reports in which objective measures were taken of individuals' need for cognition. The Zeitgeist of the cognitive consistency theories that emerged at about that
point in social psychology (e.g., Brehm & Cohen, 1962;
Festinger, 1957; Heider, 1958; Osgood & Tannenbaum,
1955) and the absence of any published version of the
Need for Cognition Scale would seem to have contributed to the paucity of research on need for cognition.

116

NEED FOR COGNITION

is a need to understand and make reasonable
the experiential world" (p. 291). Gardner
Murphy (1947) described a similar tendency
as characterizing "thinkers," for whom he
suggested it had become "fun to think" (p.
405) and to "quest for reality" (p. 407). Katz
(1960) viewed individuals as possessing a
"need to understand" (p. 170); in Katz's
view, some attitudes develop because their
referents either satisfy or frustrate this need
for particular individuals.
The concept of need for cognition was
distinguished conceptually by Cohen et al.
(1955) from gestalt models of tendencies to
structure the environment (cf. Witkin, Dyk,
Faterson, Goodenough, & Karp, 1962) by
postulating that "feelings of tension and deprivation arise from its frustration" (p. 291).
Cohen et al. (1955) proposed that the resultant tension would lead to "active efforts
to structure the situation and increase understanding" (p. 291).2
The sparse literature on this individual
difference suggests the utility of identifying
this dimension for any study in which active
cognitive processing is postulated.
Past Research
In the first empirical study of the need for
cognition (Cohen et al., 1955), 57 undergraduates from the University of Michigan
completed two measures of need for cognition (described below), read either an ambiguous or structured story about a student's
interview with a potential employer, and
rated the story along several dimensions
(e.g., liking for the story, difficulty in understanding the story, effort expended to
understand the story). The results disclosed
that individuals possessing high need for cognition rated the ambiguous story as being
less interesting and likable than the structured story, whereas individuals characterized as possessing low or moderate need for
cognition did not rate these stories differently. No differences emerged between the
groups of subjects in terms of the reported
effort they expended to understand the stories. Cohen et al. (1955) attributed this null
effect to the paucity of measurement and to
the failure of the individuals possessing a
high need for cognition to complete their

117

retrospective restructuring of the ambiguous
story. Presumably, due to the experimental
procedures, these individuals were unable to
expand the effort they would normally tend
to evince to attain a more organized and
veridical view of the ambiguous story,
whereas there was no need to expend much
effort to understand the structured story.
Evidence for the hypothesis that individuals of high rather than low need for cognition are more likely to organize, elaborate
on, and evaluate the information to which
they are exposed was reported in a study by
Cohen (1957). Thirty-five undergraduates
at Yale University served as subjects, and
a highly controversial and relevant advocacy
that a stricter scoring procedure of, grading
on the curve should be adopted at Yale University served as the attitude issue. A pretest
was administered as part of a larger opinion
questionnaire to determine the extent to
which subjects agreed that grading on the
curve would be a "decided advantage," and
need for cognition was assessed. Approximately 1 month later, the subjects were introduced to a communicator who was to
speak on the current grading problems. The
communicator was described as a faculty
member from the psychology department,
who chaired the departmental committee
charged with evaluating grading problems.
Supposedly, his purpose in speaking to the
students was to inform them of the current
grading problems and to obtain their views
on the issue and its probable outcome. About
half of the subjects heard the communicator
detail the grading problem ("need arousal"
communication) and subsequently provide
information about how grading on the curve
was a judicious solution to the grading prob2
Cohen's use of the term need was not meant to imply
that a rudimentary biological state of deprivation was
necessarily involved. He argued instead that the "need
for cognition may be said to qualify as a need since it
directs behavior toward a goal and causes tension when
this goal is not attained" (Cohen et al., 1955, p. 291).
This tension may simply reflect the frustration of an
activity that, as Gardner Murphy (1947) suggested,
certain individuals considered great fun in and of itself.
Accordingly, goal-directed behavior that arises because
of an individual's need for cognition can be internal.
"The person does not necessarily have to do something
in and to the environment, as in the case of the satisfaction of other needs" (Cohen et al., 1955, p. 293).

118

JOHN T. CACIOPPO AND RICHARD E. PETTY

lem; the remaining subjects heard the same
information but in reverse order (i.e., the
information about a possible solution was
presented prior to the description of the
problem).
Cohen (1957) hypothesized that outlining
the problem and its possible solution would
elicit more attitude change than the reverse
order of presentation and that this order effect would be attenuated for individuals possessing a high need for cognition: This is
because the subjects who possessed high
need for cognition, theoretically, were already motivated to think about the communication, whereas the subjects with low
need for cognition needed to be motivated
to think about the communication by explicitly detailing the problem first. The results conferred support for both hypotheses.
Moreover, no differences were obtained between the groups in their learning and retention of the content of the communication,
which suggests that the attitudinal differences were not the result of simple differ. ences in attention or message learning.3

measure of individuals' need for cognition,
where the term need is used in a statistical
(i.e., likelihood or tendency) rather than biological (i.e., tissue deprivation) sense (see
Footnote 2). We entertained a number of
assessment formats, including those used by
Cohen (Cohen et al., 1955; Cohen, 1957),
but selected a format similar to that used
in measuring the need for achievement
(McClelland, Atkinson, Clark, & Lowell,
1953; Mehrabian & Banks, 1978). First, a
pool of opinion statements that appeared
relevant to the need for cognition was generated. Second, statements that we judged
in preliminary testing to be ambiguous (i.e.,
criterion of ambiguity) were revised or eliminated. Third, the remaining pool of 45 items
was administered to groups who were known
to differ along the dimension of need for
cognition, as conceptualized here. Members
of a large midwestern university faculty
served as subjects in the high-need-for-cognition group, whereas members of assembly
lines in factories in the surrounding community served as subjects in the low-needfor-cognition group. The criterion of irrelevance was applied to eliminate any item that
Study 1
failed to discriminate between these two
Surprisingly, there is no instrument avail- groups. The criterion of internal consistency
able for measuring individuals' need for cog- was applied to delete any item that failed to
nition. Cohen et al. (1955) used two mea- correlate significantly (p < .01) with the tosures: the Situations Checklist and the Hi- tal score that was calculated from the items
erarchy of Needs Measure.4 The Situations that met all other criteria.
Checklist, which was also used by Cohen
(1957), was described as
Method

a group of forced choice reactions to a wide variety of
hypothetical situations. One of the three possible responses to each situation was assumed a priori to indicate a desire for more information and/or understanding. (Cohen et al., 1955, p. 292)

The Hierarchy of Needs Measure was
described in a little more detail but was not
employed by Cohen (1957). Subjects were
asked to order by relative importance all
possible sets of three statements that represented the following five needs: achievement, affiliation, autonomy, recognition, and
cognition. No detail was provided about the
nature of these statements except that they
were "assumed to center around (the) essential meaning (of the needs listed above)"
(Cohen et al., 1955, p. 292).
In our first study, we sought to develop a

Subjects and design. Participants were drawn randomly from the University of Iowa faculty in the col3
It might be argued that students possessing a high
rather than low need for cognition were more positively
disposed toward grading qn the curve because they were
more successful in school or were more intelligent.
Cohen (1957), however, found the correlation between
college grades and need for cognition to be nonsignificant. Furthermore, an analysis of covariance of the posttest attitude measures was performed in which the pretest attitude measure served as the covariate. Hence,
the effects of the need for cognition on students' susceptibility or resistance to persuasion are unlikely to
have been spurious.
4
Individuals' need for cognition, when assessed using
the Situations Checklist and the Hierarchy of Needs
Measure, was correlated +.50 (Cohen et al., 1955).
Neither measure is available any longer (Stotland,
Note 1).

NEED FOR COGNITION

119

leges of law, liberal arts, and education and from as- among the 34 Need for Cognition Scale items that were
sembly line workers in the Iowa City-Cedar Rapids .selected for use in subsequent studies and factor anaarea, who were employed in heavy equipment and au- lyzed by the principal-components method.5 The numtomotive parts industries. Of the 96 participants, males ber of factors was determined by the latent roots greater
outnumbered females as follows: n for male faculty was than one and the scree test. Ten factors yielded latent
27, n for male workers was 33, n for female faculty was roots greater than one, but only one factor was retained
16, n for female workers was 20. A maximum cell size following the scree test (see Figure 1). For example,
was arbitrarily set at 24, and the data from three male the first factor, which had an eigenvalue of 10.22, acfaculty and nine male workers were selected randomly counted for 30.1% of the variance; the second and third
and deleted from the analysis. Thus, a 2 (sex of sub- factors had eigenvalues of 2.31 and 1.82 and accounted
ject) X 2 (need for cognition) between-subjects factorial for 6.8% and 5.4% of the variance, respectively. The
first factor, therefore, was clearly dominant.
design was employed.
Materials and procedure. An initial item pool was
The salient factor loadings of the items on the first
constructed on the basis of a few examples cited by factor are presented in Table 3. It is suggested by inCohen et al. (1955) in their description of the Need for specting the pattern weights in Table 3 that the retained
Cognition Scale and on the basis of adaptations of factor represents people's reported tendency to engage
Mehrabian and Bank's (1978) questionnaire for mea- in and enjoy thinking. All of the items were positively
suring achieving tendency. Following informal pilot test- weighted, with the highest loadings appearing on items
ing and deletion of ambiguous items, we selected the 45 such as "Thinking is not my idea of fun" (following
items displayed in Table 1 for the initial item pool. To reverse scoring) and "I prefer complex to simple probattenuate response bias, some items were worded posi- lems."
'
tively and others were worded negatively.
These results strongly support the effectiveness of the
Participants were asked to assist us in an attempt to present scale in assessing people's need for cognition.
scale an individual difference among people. The instructions emphasized that there were no correct anStudy 2
swers and that responses were to be made anonymously.
Responses were recorded on —4 to +4 Likert-type rating
In the first study, a scale was developed
scales (see Table 1).

Results and Discussion
hem selection. A 2 X 2 analysis of variance was
performed on each item to determine those that discriminated between the university faculty (high-needcoe)
and assembly line workers (low-needC08). We had decided beforehand to retain items that discriminated between these groups at the p < .10 level. The results of
the analyses are displayed in Table 1. As is evident from
perusing Table 1, 34 of the 45 items were exceptional
discriminators between the faculty and workers, and sex
differences and interactions were uncommon. Not surprisingly, when the sum of all items listed in Table 1
was subjected to an analysis of variance, a strong effect
for need for cognition was evidenced, F(\, 80) = 36.98,
p < .0001, whereas neither the main effect for sex nor
the interaction was significant, (ps> .14). The same
pattern of results emerged when an analysis was performed for the sum of the 34 items that were selected
for use in succeeding experiments: University faculty
scored much higher on the scale (M = 2.18) than
assembly line workers (M = .70), F(\, 80) =
47.28, p < .0001, whereas there were no differences as
a function of sex or Sex X Need for Cognition
(ps > .20).
Internal consistency. The results of the analyses of
internal consistency are presented in Table 2. The tests
indicated that the items selected for use in succeeding
experiments exhibited a high degree of interrelatedness.
First, each of these items correlated significantly with
the total score of these items (N = 84, ps < .01), whereas
this was not the case for some of the unselected items.
Second, the Spearman-Brown split-half coefficient was
large and highly significant (p < .0001, see Table 2).
Factor analysis. Phi coefficients were computed

that met the criteria of ambiguity, irrelevance, and internal consistency. The items
were understood by both faculty and assembly line workers, the scale discriminated between these groups of workers, and a high
and statistically significant level of interitem
reliability was evidenced. There were no sex
differences in response to the Need for Cognition Scale, nor was there an interaction
between sex of subject and his or her need
for cognition (as determined by group membership - faculty vs. worker). Finally, a factor analysis identified one major factor that
seemed to consist of items that assessed the
tendency for the individuals to gain intrinsic
rewards from thinking per se in a variety of
situations.
A second study was conducted to replicate
this factor analysis, using a larger population
of subjects from a different area of the country, who were more similar to each other on
a variety of dimensions than were the university faculty and assembly line workers.
It was expected that the internal structure
of the Need for Cognition Scale developed
in Study 1 would be obtained in Study 2 as
well.
5
A factor analysis of all 45 items yielded data and
interpretations very similar to those reported in the text
for the analysis of the 34 retained items.

120

JOHN T. CACIOPPO AND RICHARD E. PETTY

Table 1
The Need for Cognition Scale
F ratio'
Item
number

Group

Sex

Group X Sex

Item wording

c

7.22

<1

<1

2

<1

1.95

1.65

3

1.13

<1

<1

4C

10.16

<1

<1

5C

8.72

<1

<1

6

1.71

2.16

1.52

7
8

<1
2.64

<1
2.50

<1
1.93

9C

3.93

1.37

<1

10"

8.41

<1

<1

ir

6.73

<1

<1

\T

5.86

<1

<1

\y

12.06

<1

<1

14C

2.73

<1

3.31

I really enjoy a task that involves coming up
with new solutions to problems.
I believe that if I think hard enough, I will
be able to achieve my goals in life.
I am very optimistic about my mental
abilities.
I would prefer a task that is intellectual,
difficult, and important to one that is
somewhat important but does not require
much thought.
I tend to set goals that can be accomplished
only by expending considerable mental
effort.
When something I read confuses me, I just
put it down and forget it.b
I take pride in the products of my reasoning.
I don't usually think about problems that
others have found to be difficult.1"
I am usually tempted to put more thought
into a task than the job minimally requires.
Learning new ways to think doesn't excite
me very much.b
I am hesitant about making important
decisions after thinking about them.b
I usually end up deliberating about issues
even when they do not affect me
personally.
I prefer just to let things happen rather than
try to understand why they turned out that
way.b
I have difficulty thinking
in new and unfa15

C

15

14.88

<1

<1

16C

23.10

<1

6.19

17°
18

9.26
2.65

<1
<1

6.16
1.37

19C
20'
21°

6.15
3.32
17.30

<1
6.40
<1

<1
9.73
<1

22C

16.24

<1

2.09

23C

10.68

<1

<1

24°

21.10

<1

<1

25
26C

1.75
4.21

<1
<1

<1
<1

l

miliar situations.

The idea of relying on thought to make my
way to the top does not appeal to me.b
The notion of thinking abstractly is not
appealing to me.b
I am an intellectual.
I find it especially satisfying to complete an
important task that required a lot of
thinking and mental effort.
I only think as hard as I have to.b
I don't reason well under pressure.6
I like tasks that require little thought once
I've learned them.b
I prefer to think about small, daily projects
to long-term ones.b
I would rather do something that requires
little thought than something that is sure
to challenge my thinking abilities.11
I find little satisfaction in deliberating hard
and for long hours. b
I think primarily because I have to.b
I more often talk with other people about the
reasons for and possible solutions to
international problems than about gossip
or tidbits of what famous people are doing.

NEED FOR COGNITION

121

Table 1 (Continued)
F ratio"
Item
number

Group

Sex

27C

4.59

<1

28C

4.37

29C

26.25

9.48

. 5.06

30°

2.75

<1

<1

31C

7.25

6.96

5.75

32C
33c

15.78
27.47

<1
<1

<1
<1

34

<1

<1

2.67

35C

16.25

2.69

1.09

36

<1

1.08

6.13

37C

25.93

3.80

1.08

38
39'

1.28
3.78

<1
<1

<1
<1

40CC
41

14.71
10.17

5.87
<1

< 1
<1

42

1.62

3.04

<1

43'

4.20

<1

2.76

44°
45'

6.11
6.88

<1
2.91

1.41
6.00

Group X Sex

<1

Item wording
These days, I see little chance for performing
well, even in "intellectual" jobs, unless one
knows the right people.6
More often than not, more thinking just
leads to more errors.'
I don't like to have the responsibility of
handling a situation that requires a lot of
thinking.'
I appreciate opportunities to discover the
strengths and weaknesses of my own
reasoning.
I feel relief rather than satisfaction after
completing a task that required a lot of
mental effort.*1
Thinking is not my idea of fun. b
I try to anticipate and avoid situations where
there is a likely chance I will have to think
in depth about something.'
I don't like to be responsible for thinking of
what I should be doing with my life.'
I prefer watching educational to entertainment programs.
I often succeed in solving difficult problems
that I set out to solve.
I think best when those around me are very
intelligent.
I am not satisfied unless I am thinking.
I prefer my life to be filled with puzzles that
I must solve.
I would prefer complex to simple problems.
Simply knowing the answer rather than
understanding the reasons for the answer
to a problem is fine with me.b
When I am figuring out a problem, what I
see as the solution to a problem is more
important than what others believe or say
is the solution.
It's enough for me that something gets the
job done, I don't care how or why it
works.'
Ignorance is bliss.'
I enjoy thinking about an issue even when
the results of my thought will have no
effect on the outcome of the issue.

Note. Subjects were instructed to indicate the degree of agreement or disagreement with each of the statements
listed above. Ratings were made using a —4 to +4 Likert-type scale, in which +4 = "very strong agreement,"
+3 = "strong agreement," +2 = "moderate agreement," +1 = "slight agreement," 0 = "neither agreement nor
disagreement," — 1 = "slight disagreement," —2 = "moderate disagreement," —3 = "strong disagreement," and
-4 = "very strong disagreement."
0
d / = ( l , 80)
' Reverse scoring was used on this item.
" This item was retained for use in the succeeding experiments.

A second purpose of this study was to determine whether the Need for Cognition
Scale was tapping a construct that was, al-

though related to, nevertheless distinguishable from cognitive style or field dependence
(cf. Goodenough, 1978). Witkin et al. (1962)

122

JOHN T. CACIOPPO AND RICHARD E. PETTY

Table 2
Reliability Estimates: Means, Standard
Deviations, and Correlation of Items
to Total Score
Item
number*
c

l
2
3
4C
5C
6
7
8
9C
10C
IT
12C
13C

M

SD

2.63
1.55
2.15
1.73
1.74
1.96
2.98
1.82
1.77
1.76
.57
1.10
2.17

1.57
2.27
1.80
2.22
1.88
1.94
1.25
2.22
2.14
2.38
2.78
2.14
2.09

Me

11Z
0
1,1

0i.*fO
Af\

15C
16°
17C
18
19C
20C
21 C
22°
23C
24g

1.86
1.83
1.07
2.74
.85
.71
.75
.87
1.39
.86

2.35
2.29
2.25
1.69
2.72
2.55
2.51
2.61
2.47
2.72

'jc
LJ

1
1 ,\Jl

26C
27°
28C
29C
30°
31=
32C
33s
34
35C
36
37C
38
39°
40C
4P
42
43C
44C
45C
Split-half
reliability

1.42
1.18
2.58
1.56
2.15
1 10
1.42
2.05
2.63
.21
2.12
1.11
.33
-.11
.42
2.18
1.25
1.86
1.98
1.81

a

fit

12
LJ '°:

Item
correlation
with total
scoreb

.59
.22
.32
.55
.42
.47
.29
.43
.35

.60
.36
.54
.53
.65
.57
.44
.56
.66
.50

.65
.65
.68
.67

9£.,11
71

2.18
2.47
1.98
2.60
1.82
2.33
2.46
2.05
2.02
2.41
1.81
2.46
2.04
2.41
2.41
2.08
2.43
2.26
2.72
2.20

.27
.29
.39
.76
.41
.56

.71
.67
.38
.33
.28
.45

.32
.61
.80
.51
.19

.56
.28
.38
.87"

Item content is specified in Table 1.
Total score of the items selected from the initial pool
for use in succeeding experiments.
c
This item was retained for use in the succeeding experiments (see Table 1).
d
Corrected by Spearman-Brown prophecy formula.
This correlation was calculated using the items selected
for use in succeeding studies.
b

1

1
*: \\
z
ou 24;

\
*"-— « , , , t t __ JL

'

*k

.

.

.

.

.

.

.

.

.

.

1

2

3

4

5

6

7

8

9

10

FACTOR
Figure I . The application of the Scree test to the factors
obtained in Study 1 led to the retention of one primary
factor, the Need for Cognition.

proposed that individuals could be characterized by an articulative or a global cognitive style. The articulative style suggests
differentiation, whereas the global style suggests a somewhat more undifferentiated
grasp of events. The former involves the separation of figure from ground, whereas the
latter bespeaks a lesser ability to separate
figure from ground. Since the articulative,
in contrast to the global, style includes a
greater tendency to restructure stimuli, some
similarity should be found between measures
of individuals' cognitive style and need for
cognition. Cognitive style and need for cognition, however, can nevertheless be distinguished conceptually. The latter represents
individuals' tendency to think about and
elaborate on events in searching for reality;
the former represents individuals' tendency
to think about events in a piecemeal or holistic fashion. Administration of both the
Need for Cognition Scale and an Embedded
Figures Test to the same subjects allowed
a test to determine whether these measures
reflected the above comparison and contrast
of these constructs.
Finally, one might argue that responses
to the Need for Cognition Scale, which is
presented in a testing format, are related to
a subject's level of test anxiety. To assess
this possibility and to examine the scale's
discriminant validity, we asked subjects to
complete Sarason's (1972) Measure of Test
Anxiety as part of their task in Study 2.
Method

Tkjf jl* lts\rl

Subjects and design. Four hundred nineteen introductory psychology students at the University of Mis-

NEED FOR COGNITION

Table 3
Salient Factor Loadings of Items in the Need
for Cognition Scale: Studies I and 2 ,
Item
number"

Study 1

Study 2

1
4
5
9
10
11
12
13
14
15
16
17
19
20
21
22
23
24
26
27
28
29
30
31

.62
.58
.44
.36
.62
.32
.53
.51
.52
.65
.58
.43
.68
.49
.65
.67
.70
.69
.23
.27
.38
.77
.43
.57

.42
.43
.48
.40
.46
.16
.21
.41
.40
.52
.42
.42
.54
.33
.54
.44
.62
;49
.30
.32
.42
.59
.37
.53

32

.72

.56

.69
.28
.43
.61
.81
.52
.55
.23
.36

.63
.40
.21
.53
.57
.47
.47
.23
.37

33
35
37
39
40
41
43
44
45
Correlation
between
factor loadings
from Studies 1 and 2

.76"

a

Item content and scoring are specified in Table 1.
Although only 34 items were used in Study 2, the original numbering is used here to identify the items as they
appear in Table 1.
b
N = 34, p< .001.
souri completed the Need for Cognition Scale, a computer adapted form of the Group Embedded Figures
Test of field dependence (CF-1, French, Ekstrom, &
Price, 1963) and Sarason's (1972) Test Anxiety Scale.
Subjects were tested in groups of 15 to 30 members.
The Need for Cognition Scale required subjects to
respond to the 34 statements developed in Study 1. In
the present study, subjects responded to the items by
shading in a number from 1 to 5 on a computer answer
sheet in which 1 indicated "extremely uncharacteristic
of me" and 5 indicated "extremely characteristic of
me." The Group Embedded Figures Test was administered in two timed 10-min. segments. In each segment

123

subjects were asked to respond to 16 complex drawings.
For each complex drawing, subjects were required to
find which of five simpler figures was contained therein.
When the appropriate simple figure contained in the
complex drawing was found, subjects shaded in a number from 1 to 5 on a computer answer sheet, where each
number corresponded to a different, simple drawing. A
subject's score on this test was the total number of correct figures found in the total time allocated. High scores
on this test are associated with field independence.

Results and Discussion
Factor analysis. The major purpose of
Study 2 was to assess the replicability of the
factor structure obtained in Study 1 by using
the revised Need for Cognition Scale and a
much more homogeneous subject population. The factor analysis, which was conducted in the same manner as in Study 1,
produced a pattern of results that was remarkably similar to that obtained previously. As in Study 1, 10 factors in Study 2
yielded latent roots greater than one, but
only 1 factor was retained, following the
scree test (see Figure 2). The first three factors, for example, accounted for 20.0%,
5.7%, and 4.6% of the variance, respectively,
in Study 2, as compared with the 30.1%,
6.8%, and 5.4% of the variance accounted
for by these factors in Study 1. As expected,
slightly less variance was attributable to
these factors in Study 2, given the more restricted range of needs for cognition with
which we are dealing when using undergraduates from the same introductory psychology course (Study 2) rather than university faculty and factory assembly line
workers (Study 1).
The salient factor loadings of the items on
the first factor from Study 2 are presented
along with those from Study 1 in Table 3.
The pattern weights in Table 3 illustrate the
consistency of the results from Studies 1 and
2. The weightings from both studies suggest
that the retained factor represents people's
tendency to engage in and enjoy thinking.
Discriminant validity. A correlation was
calculated between the measures of need for
cognition and cognitive style; as expected,
based on the constructs that each is thought
to tap, a significant but small correlation was
found (r = .19, TV = 419, p < .001). Also as
expected, the correlation between the measures of subjects' need for cognition and test

124

JOHN T. CACIOPPO AND RICHARD E. PETTY

«'<>+
Hi
8

"3 i
2e

I

l

1

1

1

1

l

I

l

1—

I

2

3

4

5

6

7

8

9

10

FACTOR
Figure 2. The application of the Scree test to the factors
obtained in Study 2 led to the retention of one primary
factor, the Need for Cognition.

anxiety was not significant (r = .02, N =
419, ns).
In sum, the Need for Cognition Scale has
thus far been shown to assess one primary
factor in a reliable manner, to discriminate
between groups known to differ by their occupations in need for cognition, to assess a
construct related to but distinguishable from
cognitive style, and to be unrelated to (and
unbiased by) respondents' level of test anxiety.
Study 3
A third study was conducted to provide
further evidence that the Need for Cognition
Scale taps individuals' tendency to organize,
abstract, and evaluate information. First, we
reasoned that a need for cognition would
develop more in individuals who have had
positive outcomes associated with their cognitive efforts. Since an individual's general
intelligence should be one important determinant of whether he or she experiences positive or negative outcomes from thinking, we
expected that need for cognition and intelligence would be related.
Several qualifications of this hypothesis
should be noted, however. First, a perusal
of the items from the Need for Cognition
Scale in Table 1 indicates that we are not
dealing with an intelligence test per se. There
is nothing intrinsically more intelligent in the
performance per se of an individual who decides that the answer to the question, "I prefer simple to complex problems," is "strong
agreement" rather than "strong disagree-

ment." The latter response, which reflects
a higher need for cognition than the former,
might be expected more from intelligent
than unintelligent individuals because more
likely they have found it rewarding to try to
solve complex problems. Second, there can
be sizable differences among people of equal
intelligence in their past experiences when
thinking. Hence, we expected to find a significant but weak association between individuals' general intelligence and their need
for cognition.6
A second major aim of the present study
was to assess by use of the Need for .Cognition Scale the extent to which social desirability might be a confounding influence
in discriminating between people high and
low in need for cognition. The procedures of
Studies 1 and 2 suggest that social desirability may not be a major problem, since
responses were obtained in a manner assuring anonymity (e.g., during mass testing).
Nevertheless, because the Need for Cognition Scale is somewhat transparent in the
characteristic that it measures, our society
seems to place a value on thinking. Furthermore, since empiricial evidence suggests
that responses to personality scales might
reveal as much about individual differences
in self-presentation as in actual needs or disposition (Mills & Hogan, 1978), we collected measures of social desirability in the
present study to compare them with individuals' scores on the Need for Cognition Scale.
Third, the relationship between need for
cognition and dogmatism was investigated.
Rokeach (1960) reports that highly dogmatic individuals care more for social rec6

The available data on this question are inconclusive.
Cohen (1957) reported a nonsignificant correlation
(r = +.23) between the college grades and need for cognition of Yale University undergraduates.' College grades,
however, reflect not only people's general intelligence
but also their motivation to perform well in academic
pursuits, the difficulty of the discipline in which they
are studying, and so forth. Moreover, grade inflation
was a problem at Yale University at that time (recall
that Cohen used grade inflation as the topic of his message), which further attenuates the utility of college
grades for indexing general intelligence. These problems
were avoided in the present study by comparing individual's need-for-cognition scores with their overall
score on the American College Test (ACT) entrance
exam, which all students at the University of Iowa are
required to take as a prerequisite for admission.

125

NEED FOR COGNITION

ognition, salvation, and being obedient but
care less for equality, freedom, and being
broad-minded than moderately and slightly
dogmatic individuals.. The dimension of
broad-mindedness, or willingness to consider
a number of issues and positions, overlaps
somewhat with the concept of need for cognition, and hence, we might expect to find
a negative association between dogmatism
and need for cognition. The association
should be weak, however, since one's need
for cognition is a more specific construct
than the dogmatic nature of one's personality. If a strong relationship between these
measures is obtained, the validity of the
Need for Cognition Scale would be implicated.
Method
Subjects. One hundred and four (35 male and 69
female) students in an introductory psychology course
at the University of Iowa participated in the study. Subjects were tested in a large room, and they were placed
in groups that ranged from 6 to 18 members.
Materials and procedure. Each subject was given
a notebook containing the experimental instructions,
questionnaires, and answer sheet. The initial instructions, which subjects read and heard the experimenter
summarize, (a) asked that subjects indicate their overall
American College Testing Program Exam (ACT) score
oh their answer sheet,7 (b) emphasize that subjects
should indicate the answer to each question that best
described their feelings at that moment, (c) stressed that
there were no correct or incorrect answers, and (d) noted
that all responses were made anonymously. The notebooks contained the Need for Cognition Scale, Troldahl
and Powell's (1965) measure of dogmatism, and the
Marlowe-Crowne Social Desirability Scale (Crowne
& Marlowe, 1964).
Once all subjects within any given session had completed their questionnaires, they were debriefed, thanked,
assigned credit for their participation, and dismissed.

Results and Discussion
No significant sex difference was obtained
on any of the measures, and this factor will
not be discussed further.
The pattern of data provides strong support for the efficacy of the present scale to
assess the concept of need for cognition.
First, the significant correlation between the
need for cognition and reported ACT performance (r = .39, N = 104, p < .01) corresponds with the prediction that intelligence
would be positively related to an individual's
tendency to engage in and enjoy thinking per
se. One concern that might be raised with
regard to this data centers on the validity of

the reported ACT scores. To the extent that
subjects erred randomly in their reports of
ACT scores, the present test of our hypothesis is conservative, since error variance is
exaggerated. Alternatively, although subjects' responses were anonymous, they may
have exaggerated their ACT performance
to enhance any favorable impressions they
might make during the study. The nonsignificant correlation between reported ACT
score and social desirability argues against
this notion (r = .02, N = 104, ns; see Footnote 7). Furthermore, the partial correlation
between the measures of need for cognition
and ACT, with social desirability statistically eliminated, was positive and highly significant (r = .38, p < .01).
Second, the nonsignificant correlation between need for cognition and social desirability (r = .08, W = 104, ns) suggests that
the transparent purpose of the scale is not
likely to introduce a biasing of individuals'
responses to the Need for Cognition Scale
in their efforts to form a favorable impression when their responses are made anonymously. We remain cautious, however, about
the utility and validity of the present scale
in situations in which individuals' responses
are not made anonymously and are monitored by an evaluative person or audience.
Finally, the expected negative but weak
correlation between the need for cognition
and dogmatism was obtained (r = —.27,
TV = 104, p < .05). ACT and dogmatism
scores were also correlated (r = —.23, N =
104, p < .05), whereas social desirability and
dogmatism were not correlated significantly
(r = .03, N = 104, ns). The partial correlation between the measures of need for cognition and ACT, with dogmatism statistically eliminated, was positive and strong
(r= .48, /x.Ol).
Study 4
The fourth experiment was conducted to
examine the utility of identifying individual
7
In a few instances, subjects were unable to recall
their overall ACT score. These subjects were asked to
leave their phone number so that we might subsequently
contact them by phone to obtain their ACT score. We
were able to secure the ACT scores of all the subjects
who participated in this study.

126

JOHN T. CACIOPPO AND RICHARD E. PETTY

differences in need for cognition when assessing affective reactions to a cognitive task
(i.e., individuals' tendency to enjoy thinking). A number-circling task was selected in
the present study for two reasons. First, the
task is novel to subjects, thereby reducing
the likelihood that differential responses to
the task would emerge because of prior experiences with it. Second, simple and complex versions of the task, as well as posttask
assessments, have been developed previously
(e.g., Shaffer & Hendrick, 1971; see also
Petty & Brock, 1981). We reasoned that
although neither individuals of high nor low
need for cognition may particularly enjoy a
tedious number-circling task, the individuals
high in need for cognition should prefer the
complex (i.e., cognitively demanding) to the
simple version, whereas individuals low in
need for cognition should prefer the simple
to the complex version of the cognitive task.
Additionally, measures of dogmatism and
social desirability were again obtained to
replicate the previous study.
Method
Subjects and design. Ninety seven (29 male and 68
female) students in an introductory psychology course
at the University of Iowa participated in the study. Subjects were placed in groups, which ranged from 5 to 16
people, and were tested while seated in a laboratory that
was partitioned to minimize visual and auditory contact
among subjects. Subjects were randomly assigned to
perform either the simple or the complex version of the
number-circling task. Following the conclusion of the
study, each subject's status regarding need for cognition
(high vs. low) was determined by performing a median
split on all subjects' need-for-cognition scores.
Materials and procedure. Each subject was given
a notebook containing the experimental instructions,
questionnaires, task, and answer sheet. Subjects were
instructed to indicate the answer to each question that
best described how they felt, and they were told that
there were no correct or incorrect answers and that all
responses were made anonymously. The notebooks consisted of the need for cognition, dogmatism, and social
desirability scales described in Study 3; either a simple
or complex number-circling task; and a posttask questionnaire.
The first page of the number-circling task contained
the instructions for number circling and a sample with
numbers circled according to the specified rules. Subjects in the simple number-circling-task condition were
instructed to circle all Is, 5s, and 7s. Subjects in the
complex number-circling-task condition were instructed
to circle all the 3s, any 6 that preceded a 7, and every

other 4. All subjects were instructed to work as quickly
and as accurately as possible.
Each of the next three pages of the notebook contained a total of 3,500 random numbers. The random
numbers were displayed in 5 X 5 matrices, with the
matrices of numbers themselves constituting a 10 X 14
matrix. After subjects had familiarized themselves with
the task and had perused the sample, they were given
10 min. to circle as many digits as they could.8
Afterwards, subjects completed the items in a posttask questionnaire designed to assess reactions to various
aspects of the experiment (Shaffer & Hendrick, 1974).
Subjects used 7-point scales (1 = not at all, 7 = very
much) to rate the frustration and mental discomfort
experienced with task performance, mental effort expended on the task, freedom not to participate in the
experiment, interest and enjoyment in the task, degree
of justification the experimenter had in conducting the
experiment, competence of the experimenter, and frustration and mental discomfort experienced at the conclusion of the experiment.
After completing the posttask questionnaire, subjects
were debriefed, thanked, given credit for their participation, and dismissed.

Results and Discussion
As in previous studies, we found that the
need for cognition scores did not vary as a
function of the sex of subject.
An analysis of variance was conducted on
the responses to the posttask questionnaire.
Task (simple vs. complex) and need for cognition (high vs. low) served as between-subjects factors. The manipulation of task was
effective, as subjects reported expending
more effort when performing the complex
(M = 3.98) than the simple task (M = 3.13),
F(\, 93) = 7.12, p< .01.
Neither the main effect for need for cognition nor the interaction was significant on
the measure of reported mental effort. These
null findings are reminiscent of Cohen et al.'s
(1955) original study, in which individuals
high versus low in need for cognition reported expending similar amounts of mental
effort to understand an ambiguous interview. Cohen et al. (1955) suggested that the
measure was insensitive to felt differences
in mental effort and that the experimental
procedures may have imposed an artificial
ceiling on the effort that could be expended
8
Although in retrospect it would have been interesting to have analyzed the number of digits circled, this
information was not recorded by Shaffer and Hendrick
(1971, 1974) nor by us.

127

NEED FOR COGNITION

on the task. These possibilities may account
for the present similarity in perceived mental
effort expended by subjects classified as having high vs. low need for cognition. Alternatively, ihefelt mental effort may not differ
even if the individuals with high rather than
low need for cognition actually expended
more effort on the task. Thinking, or expending a given amount of mental work, may
come easier for the former individuals.
Hence, the report from people high in need
for cognition of having thought "hard"
about a task might actually signify that more
thought about the task was generated than
when the latter group of individuals reported
having thought "hard" about the task.
Suggestively, individuals who were classified
as low in need for cognition reported experiencing slightly, though not significantly,
more frustration and mental discomfort during the task (M = 3.75) than did individuals
high in need for cognition (M = 3.18), F(l,
93) = 2.45, p < .12, even though no differences were found in the reported mental effort expended. Further research on the
amount of felt and actual cognitive effort
that people of high and low need for cognition devote to intellective and nonintellective tasks is clearly desirable.
More importantly, the major aim of this
study was accomplished, as the expected
differences in the enjoyment of cognitive
tasks were clearly found. Although all the
subjects reported that they did not much
enjoy the tedious number-circling task (M =
1.65), subjects categorized as high in need
for cognition reported enjoying the complex
task more than the simple task, whereas subjects classified as low in need for cognition
reported that they enjoyed the simple task
more than the complex task, F(l, 93) = 6.98,
p< .01. Cell means are summarized in Table
4. No other test was statistically significant.9
Correlational analyses revealed several interesting effects. First, the higher the subjects' need-for-cognition scores, the less frustration and mental discomfort they reported
experiencing during the task (r = -.23,
N = 97,p < .03). Importantly, the frustration and mental discomfort that subjects reported experiencing by the time they had
completed the posttask questionnaire did not

Table 4
Reported Enjoyment From Performing the
Number-Circling Task
Tasky
Group

Simple

Complex

Need for cognition
Low
High

2.00
1.29

1.15,
2.17

Note. Enjoyment was rated on a 7-point scale, in which
1 was labeled "not at all" and 7 was labeled "very
much."

covary significantly with need for cognition
(r = -.04, TV = 97, ns), which suggests that
the former correlation reflects the differential responses by people with varying needs
for cognition to the tedious and cognitively
effortful task rather than to pre-existing trait
differences in mental anguish.10 Finally, the
9
In addition, neither simple main effect was significant, which means that the differential responses to the
tasks by subjects classified as low versus high in need
for cognition reflect relative rather than absolute effects.
The theoretical import of these observations, however,
is the same.
The possible influences of effort justification on these
ratings should be addressed briefly. Jones and Gerard
(1967) suggested, based on cognitive dissonance theory
(Festinger, 1957), that a task would be viewed more
positively to the extent that one exerted effort for little
external incentive to perform the task. There are several
reasons to reject this account of the present experimental
results. Neither the main effect for need for cognition
nor the interaction of task and need for cognition approached significance on the measure of perceived effort
expended on the task. The effort justification formulation, therefore, fails to anticipate the interaction obtained on the attitude measure. Alternatively, one might
argue that dissonance arousal was constant for individuals high versus low in need for cognition (and greater
for complex than simple-task conditions) but that dissonance reduction followed along different modes for
individuals high versus low in need for cognition. This
account is implicated, however, by failures to find main
effects or interactions involving need for cognition on
measures of perceived choice and source derogation (cf.
Shaffer & Hendrick, 1974). Thus, dissonance accounts
seem irrelevant or unparsimonious, given the observed
responses to manipulation checks, attitude measures,
and ancillary items.
10
It should be apparent from this analysis that need
for cognition is a predisposition that may or may not
influence behavior, depending on the specific situation
in which the individuals find themselves. That is, it is
viewed as a tendency rather than as an invariant trait

128

JOHN T. CACIOPPO AND RICHARD E. PETTY

correlational analyses disclosed that the higher
the subjects' need for cognition scores, the
less likely they were to derogate the
experimenter by rating her as unjustified
(/• = -.22*TV = 97, p < .03) or incompetent
(r = -.23, N=97,p< .03). These data are
consistent with the conception that people
high in need for cognition tend to engage in
and enjoy thinking about the central task at
hand rather than responding to the peripheral
cues associated with the task, which people
low in need for cognition might be more likely
to do (e.g., derogating the source—see Petty
& Cacioppo, 198la, Ch. 9).
Finally, analyses of the first part of Study
4, which was a replication of Study 3, indicated that (a) the correlation between need
for cognition and dogmatism (r = —.23, N =
97, p < .05) was similar to that obtained
previously and that (b) the correlation between need for cognition and social desirability, though small, was statistically significant (r = .21, N = 97, p < .05). Regarding
this latter correlation, we can note that the
major difference between Studies 3 and 4
was that subjects completed the scales as a
member of a group in a classroom in Study
3 and while seated individually in cubicles
in Study 4. This lends some credence to the
caveat raised in the discussion of Study 3:
The present version of the Need for Cognition Scale, with its strong face validity,
may be susceptible to social desirability
biases when subjects believe that their responses might not be anonymous and/or that
they are being monitored by an evaluative
person or audience. Nevertheless, this correlation was weak in the present study, and
social desirability biases did not change the
pattern of data obtained.11
In sum, number-circling and analogous
tasks have been used effectively in past research to tax subjects' processing capacity
to diminish their thinking about a persuasive
communication (see Petty & Brock, 1981 for
a review of this literature). Subjects' ratings
or disposition. Thus, we concur with Cohen et al.'s
(1955) use of the term need for cognition to mean that
it is an individual difference that directs behavior toward
a goal and causes tension when this goal is not attained
(see Footnote 2 for further discussion of this point).

clearly indicated that the complex version
of the task was perceived as being more cognitively effortful than the simple version.
Moreover, individuals classified as high in
need for cognition by the scale found the
simple version more unpleasant than the
complex version, whereas individuals classified as low in need for cognition found the
complex version more unpleasant than the
simple (less cognitively demanding) version
of the task. These data can be explained by
considering individual differences in people's
tendency to enjoy complex problem-solving
activities.
General Discussion
Scale Construction and Reliability
The Need for Cognition Scale was developed in Study 1, where a pool of items with
strong face validity for measuring the need
for cognition was generated and revised to
meet the criterion of ambiguity. The response bias of acquiescence was minimized
by working some items for reverse scoring
(i.e., a' negative rather than positive answer
indicates a high need for cognition). In addition, the instructions for completing the
scale emphasized that there were no correct
or incorrect answers and that responses to
the questions were anonymous. These instructions were designed to mitigate against
other response biases, which they apparently
were effective in doing; the results of Studies
2-4 indicated that neither test anxiety nor
social desirability were problematic biases
when the Need for Cognition Scale was administered in its present form.
In Study 1, the number of items with
which we began was trimmed to 45 and ad1
' Partial correlations were calculated between heed
for cognition and the other dependent measures collected in the study. These partial correlations, which
statistically eliminated the effects of social desirability,
revealed the same pattern of data and levels of statistical
significance as reported in the text. Thus, self-presentational biases are unlikely accounts for the experimental results. Moreover, the present complement of results
suggest that people are not responding in a manner that
simply serves to boost their esteem in their own eyes,
since their level of need for cognition also proved to have
predictive validity.

NEED FOR COGNITION

ministered to groups known to differ in their
need for cognition. The low-need-for-cognition group consisted of people who perform
repetitive, monotonous tasks for a living—
factory workers who serve on assembly lines
for the manufacture of automotive and
heavy equipment parts. The high-need-forcognition group consisted of people who presumably engage in and enjoy thinking for
a living—university faculty in selected departments from a major state university. The
criterion of irrelevance was applied by selecting for inclusion in the Need for Cognition Scale only those items that discriminated between the responses of these groups.
Finally, the criterion of internal consistency
was met by the included items, with each
correlation between individual items and the
total need-for-cognition score and the splithalf reliability coefficient reaching acceptable levels of statistical significance (ps <
.01). The final scale included 34 of the 45
items that were administered in Study 1 (see
Tables 1 and 2).
A factor analysis of these selected items
revealed one major factor, with strong, positive weightings on all 34 items (see Table
3). Study 2 was conducted primarily to determine the stability of this factor structure.
Students from an introductory psychology
course constituted a subject pool that was
markedly more homogenous than the pool
used in Study 1. Nevertheless, one major
factor again was obtained. Moreover, the
pattern of factor weightings found in Studies
1 and 2 was very similar (r - .76, TV = 34
factor weightings, p < .001). Thus, the items
and test not only exhibited strong internal
consistency, but the scale exhibited a stable
factor structure (see Table 3).
In sum, the response by any single individual to any given item is determined by
several factors, most of which are unrelated
to the individual's need for cognition. The
strong dominance of a single factor, the stable factor weightings, and the high, internal
consistency that was obtained indicate that
the shared variation of the items reliably
assessed a common factor. Moreover, this
common factor is unlikely to be an artifact
of response biases, since instructions and
item wording were designed to minimize ac-

129

quiescence and self-presentation, and correlations between need for cognition and
both social desirability and test anxiety were
nonsignificant or weak.

Validity
The results of the present; series of studies
speak well for the validity of the scale as a
measure of the construct—need for cognition. The scale was derived by generating
items with face validity and selecting for inclusion those that discriminated between individuals who possessed high versus low need
for cognition. This empirical method of deriving the scale enhances the confidence one
can place on the construct validity of the
scale. Convergent and discriminant validity
for the scale are suggested by the results of
Studies 2-4. A series of hypotheses was generated regarding probable interrelationships
that might exist between need for cognition
and other constructs (e.g., field independence, open-mindedness, overall ACT
scores). In addition, scales in which need for
cognition was not expected to covary were
also identified and administered (e.g., test
anxiety, social desirability). The pattern of
correlations strongly supported the validity
of the scale for measuring need for cognition
per se.
Content validity, or the extent to which
the items in the scale represent all the possible positions on the dimension of need for
cognition, cannot be determined in a statistical manner. However, the scale was developed in a manner that enhances the likelihood of content validity, since we began with
a sizable pool of diverse items and selected
for the populations in which to develop the
scale groups of individuals who were thought
to fall near the extremes on the dimension
of need for cognition. Inspection of the retained items in Table 1 indicates the good
content validity of the scale.
Finally, the predictive validity of the scale
was evident in the results of Study 4. Subjects performed the number-circling task
because they believed it was important for
research purposes. Attitudes toward the
number-circling task would have appeared
to have been unaffected by the complexity

130

JOHN T. CACIOPPO AND RICHARD E. PETTY

of the rules had individual differences in
need for cognition not been considered. With
an assessment of need for cognition included,
the pattern of data was easily interpretable
and interesting. No one greatly enjoyed the
number-circling task, but people who scored
high on the Need for Cognition Scale found
more unpleasant the task that required them
to implement a simple rather than complex
set of rules; people who scored low on the
scale rated more unpleasant the task with
complex rather than simple rules. These data
clearly suggest the utility of identifying and
measuring individual differences in people's
tendency to engage in and enjoy thinking—
their need for cognition.
One aspect of the experimental results
that holds special promise for future research is to be found in the correlational
analyses that hinted that individuals who
have a low rather than a high need for cognition are more likely to think about and
derogate the experimenter. Over the past
three decades, theorists in attitude research
have generally described the persuasion process as either one in which message recipients actively process the arguments presented in a communication or one in which
the message arguments are virtually irrelevant to persuasion, since attitude change results from various noncontent cues in the
situation, such as the competence of the
source (see Cacioppo & Petty, 1980; Cialdini, Petty, & Cacioppo, 1981; Petty & Cacioppo, 198 Ib). We have characterized people as traveling under specified circumstances
one of two routes to persuasion (see Petty
& Cacioppo, 1981(a), Ch. 9). Under the
first, or "central route," thinking about issue-relevant information is the most direct
determinant of the direction and amount of
persuasion produced. Under the second, or
"peripheral route," noncontent cues in the
persuasion setting (e.g., speed of speech or
expertise), which allow a person to evaluate
a communication or decide what attitudinal
position to adopt without engaging in any
extensive cognitive work relevant to the issue
under consideration, are the most direct determinants of attitude change.
An important situational determinant of
which route will be followed is how exten-

sively is the message recipient personally involved with the issue under consideration
(cf. Petty & Cacioppo, 1979, 1981b). When
personal involvement is high, rational processing of the message content tends to predominate. When a message is on a topic of
low personal importance, noncontent features of the persuasion setting tend to be
more important in determining attitude
change. An important dispositional determinant of which route will be followed may
be the extent to which recipients are motivated by their need for cognition to think
about issues that they confront. Research
that examines the role of need for cognition
as a moderator variable in determining
which route to persuasion will be traveled
would be highly informative.
Reference Note
1. E. Stotland, personal communication, 1979.

References
Asch, S. Social psychology. New York: Prentice-Hall,
1952.
Blumenthal, A. L. The process of cognition. Englewood
Cliffs, N. J.: Prentice-Hall, 1977.
Brehm, J., & Cohen, A. Explorations in cognitive dissonance. New York: Wiley, 1962.
Cacioppo, J. T., & Petty, R. E. Sex differences in influenceability: Toward specifying the underlying processes. Personality and Social Psychology Bulletin,
1980,6, 651-656.
Cialdini, R. B., Petty, R. E., & Cacioppo, J. T. Attitudes
and attitude changes. In M. R. Rosenweig & L. W.
Porter (Eds.), Annual review of psychology (Vol. 32).
Palo Alto, Calif.: Annual Reviews, 1981.
Cohen, A. R. Need for cognition and order of communication as determinants of opinion change. In C.
I. Hovland (Ed.), The order of presentation in persuasion. New Haven, Conn.: Yale University Press,
1957.
Cohen, A. R., Stotland, E., & Wolfe, D. M. An experimental investigation of need for cognition. Journal
of Abnormal and Social Psychology, 1955, SI, 291294.
Crowne, D. P., & Marlowe, D. The approval motive.
New York: Wiley, 1964.
Festinger, L. A theory of cognitive dissonance. Stanford, Calif.: Stanford University Press, 1957.
French, J. W., Ekstrom, R. B., & Price, L. A. Kit of
reference test for cognitive factors. Princeton, N.J.:
Educational Testing Service, 1963.
Goodenough, D. R. Field dependence. In H. London
& J. Exner, Jr. (Eds.), Dimensions of personality.
New York: Wiley, 1978.

NEED FOR COGNITION
Heider, F. The psychology of interpersonal relations.
New York: Wiley, 1958.
Jones, E. E., & Gerard, H. B. Foundations of social
psychology. New York: Wiley, 1967.
Katz, D. The functional approach to the study of attitudes. Public Opinion Quarterly, 1960, 24, 163-204.
Maslow, A. H. Dynamics of personality organization,
I & II. Psychological Review, 1943, 50, 514-558.
McClelland, D. C., Atkinson, J. W., Clark, R. A., &
Lowell, E. L. The achievement motive. New York:
Appleton, 1953.
Mehrabian, A., & Banks, L. A questionnaire measure
of individual differences in achieving tendency. Educational and Psychological Measurement, 1978,38,
475-478.
Mills, C., & Hogan, R. A role theoretical interpretation
of personality scale item responses. Journal of Personality, 1978, 46, 778-785.
Murphy, G. Personality: A biosocial approach to
origins and structure. New York: Harper, 1947.
Osgood, C., & Tannenbaum, P. The principle of congruity in the prediction of attitude change. Psychological Review, 1955, 62, 42-55.
Petty, R. E., & Brock, T. C. Thought disruption and
persuasion: Methodological and theoretical considerations. In R. E. Petty, T. M. Ostrom, & T. C. Brock
(Eds.), Cognitive response in persuasion. Hillsdale,
N.J.: Erlbaum, 1981.
Petty, R. E., & Cacioppo, J. T. Issue involvement can
increase or decrease persuasion by enhancing message-relevant cognitive responses. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 1979, 37, 1915-1926.
Petty, R. E., & Cacioppo, J. T. Attitudes and persuasion: Classic and contemporary approaches. Dubuque, Iowa: Wm. C. Brown, 1981. (a)

131

Petty, R. E., & Cacioppo, J. T. Issue involvement as a
moderator of the effects on attitude of advertising
content and context. Advances in Consumer Research, 1981, 8, 20-24. (b)
Rokeach, M. The open and closed mind. New York:
Basic Books, 1960.
Sarason, I. G. Experimental approaches to test anxiety:
Attentional and the uses of information. In C. D.
Spielberger (Ed.), Anxiety: Current trends in theory
and research (Vol. 2). New York: Academic Press,
1972.
Sarnoff, I., & Katz, D. The motivational bases of attitude change. Journal of Abnormal and Social Psychology, 1954,49, 115-124.
Shaffer, D. R., & Hendrick, C. Effects of actual effort
and anticipated effort on task enhancement. Journal
of Experimental Social Psychology, 1971, 7, 435447.
Shaffer, D. R,, & Hendrick, C. Dogmatism and tolerance for ambiguity as determinants of differential
reactions to cognitive inconsistency. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 1974, 29, 601-608.
Troldahl, V. C., & Powell, F. A. A short-form dogmatism scale for use in field studies. Social Forces,
1965,^,211-214.
Witkin, H. A., Dyk, R. B., Faterson, H. F., Goodenough, D. R., & Karp, S. A. Psychological differentiation. Potomac, Md.: Erlbaum, 1974. (Originally
published, 1962)
Wyer, R. S., Jr., & Carlston, D. E. Social cognition,
inference, and attribution. Hillsdale, N.J.: Erlbaum,
1979.

Received December 30, 1980

