Journal of Personality and Social Psychology
1996, Vol. 70, No. 1, 141-156

Copyright 1996 by the American Psychological Association, Inc.
0022-3514/96/$3.00

Self-Concept Clarity:
Measurement, Personality Correlates, and Cultural Boundaries
Jennifer D. Campbell, Paul D. Trapnell, Steven J. Heine, liana M. Katz,
Loraine F. Lavallee, and Darrin R. Lehman

This document is copyrighted by the American Psychological Association or one of its allied publishers.
This article is intended solely for the personal use of the individual user and is not to be disseminated broadly.

University of British Columbia
Self-concept clarity (SCC) references a structural aspect of the self-concept: the extent to which selfbeliefs are clearly and confidently denned, internally consistent, and stable. This article reports the
SCC Scale and examines (a) its correlations with self-esteem (SE), the Big Five dimensions, and
self-focused attention {Study 1); (b) its criterion validity (Study 2); and (c) its cultural boundaries
(Study 3). Low SCC was independently associated with high Neuroticism, low SE, low Conscientiousness, low Agreeableness, chronic self-analysis, low internal state awareness, and a ruminative
form of self-focused attention. The SCC Scale predicted unique variance in 2 external criteria: the
stability and consistency of self-descriptions. Consistent with theory on Eastern and Western selfconstruals, Japanese participants exhibited lower levels of SCC and lower correlations between SCC
and SE than did Canadian participants.

Within the last couple of decades, psychologists1 view of the
self-concept has undergone a dramatic transformation (Markus
& Wurf, 1987). Early researchers treated the self-concept as a
unitary, monolithic entity—a stable, generalized view of the
self—and typically focused their research efforts on a single aspect of the self-concept, self-esteem. Contemporary researchers, in contrast, rely on a multifaceted, dynamic construal in
which the self-concept is defined as a cognitive schema—an organized knowledge structure that contains traits, values, episodic and semantic memories about the self and controls the
processing of self-relevant information (e.g., Greenwald & Pratkanis, 1984; Kihlstrom&Cantor, L984;Kihlstrometal., 1988;
Markus, 1977).
The current conceptualization allows a distinction between the
contents of the self-concept and its structure. The contents can
be usefully subdivided into knowledge components—Who/What
am I?—and evaluative components—How do I feel about myself?
Examples of knowledge components include beliefs about one's
specific attributes (e.g., traits, physical characteristics), as well as
roles, values, and personal goals. Evaluative components include
the positivity of specific self-beliefs and self-esteem, a global selfevaluation that is the product of viewing "the self" as an attitude
object. Structural characteristics of the self-concept refer to how
the knowledge components or specific self-beliefs are organized.
For example, Linville (1985, 1987) coined the term self-complex-

Jennifer D. Campbell, Paul D. Trapnell, Steven J. Heine, liana M.
Katz, Loraine F. Lavallee, and Darrin R. Lehman, Department of Psychology, University of British Columbia, Vancouver, British Columbia;
Canada.
This research was funded by a grant from the Social Science and Humanities Research Council.
Correspondence concerning this article should be addressed to Jennifer D. Campbell, Department of Psychology, University of British
Columbia, 2136 West Mall, Vancouver, British Columbia, Canada
V6T1Z4.

ity to represent the number of different or independent dimensions
that underlie the organization. Donahue and her associates
(Donahue, Robins, Roberts, & John, 1993) have focused on a
different aspect of complexity: the extent to which these dimensions are integrated. Another structural variable can be found in
Showers's (1992) work on compartmentalization, the extent to
which positive and negative self-beliefs reside in different
dimensions.
The present article is concerned with another structural aspect
of the self-concept, namely, self-concept clarity (SCC; Campbell,
1990; Campbell & Lavallee, 1993). SCC is defined as the extent to
which the contents of an individual's self-concept (e.g., perceived
personal attributes) are clearly and confidently defined, internally
consistent, and temporally stable. A couple of points may serve to
bring the clarity construct into sharper focus.
First, clarity overlaps with a number of other, more traditional constructs. One construct with obvious overlap is that of
identity (achievement, status, integration, etc.). Identity, however, has a much richer and more complex set of elements than
clarity (e.g., Adler, 1959; Allport, 1961; Baumeister, 1986; Erikson, 1959; Marcia, 1980), characteristics that render the
identity construct rather difficult to assess empirically. The literature also contains a plethora of overlapping constructs that
have a narrower focus than clarity. For example, Rosenberg's
(1965) notion of self-concept stability focuses on the temporal
stability of self-beliefs, whereas the constructs of role variability
(Block, 1961a) and self-consistency (Gergen & Morse, 1967)
address the internal consistency of self-beliefs. In addition, the
Hogan Personality Inventory Identity scale (Hogan, 1986) and
the Identity Integration scale (O'Brien & Epstein, 1988) focus
on generalized certainty about the self, combined with manifestations of certainty such as decisiveness and well-defined longterm goals.
Second, clarity is a characteristic of people's beliefs about
themselves (i.e., their self-concepts). It is mute with respect to
the accuracy of those beliefs and therefore does not necessarily

141

This document is copyrighted by the American Psychological Association or one of its allied publishers.
This article is intended solely for the personal use of the individual user and is not to be disseminated broadly.

142

CAMPBELL ET AL.

imply self-knowledge in the sense of insight or awareness of
one's behavioral potentials (Wicklund & Eckert, 1992). A person could hold highly articulated self-beliefs that one might argue, on the basis of behavior, are inaccurate.
Clarity and the other aforementioned structural variables
(e.g., self-complexity) are theoretically independent of the
contents of the self-concept. That is, any particular set of selfbeliefs could, in principle, be organized with varying degrees of
complexity or be held with different levels of confidence and
stability. Campbell (1990; Campbell & Fehr, 1990; Campbell,
Chew, & Scratchley, 1991; see also Baumgardner, 1990), has
demonstrated, however, a connection between clarity and global
self-esteem, an evaluative component of the contents. Although
high-self-esteem people have positive, well-articulated beliefs
about the self, the prototypic low-self-esteem person does not,
in contrast, have a well-defined negative view of the self. The
self-concepts of low-self-esteem people are better described as
evaluatively neutral and, more important, are characterized by
relatively high levels of uncertainty, instability, and inconsistency (i.e., low clarity).
The demonstration of the self-esteem-clarity relation has
proven to be theoretically useful in understanding many of the
contradictory, puzzling, and paradoxicalfindingsin the self-esteem literature. Although lack of space precludes a review here,
a number of self-esteem phenomena (e.g., low self-esteem plasticity, Brockner, 1984) that are not easily understood by referencing differences in the positivity of self-beliefs are cogently
and parsimoniously explained by the fact that high- and lowself-esteem people differ in the clarity or certainty of their selfbeliefs (e.g., Baumeister, 1993; Blaine&Crocker, 1993;Campbell & Lavallee, 1993; Setterlund & Neidenthal, 1993; Tice,
1993).
The validity of these explanations, however, hinges on the assumption that clarity, like self-esteem, can be conceptualized as
a relatively stable trait. Although plausible, this assumption is
currently unsupported. The empirical research examining the
self-esteem-clarity relation has generally pretested participants
on standard self-report scales of self-esteem and subsequently
tested them on a number of unobtrusive measures of clarity
(e.g., the extremity, internal consistency, and temporal stability
of their self-descriptions); the evidence for the relation lies in
the convergent associations that have emerged across studies
and measures (Campbell & Lavallee, 1993).
Research Aims
One goal of the present article was to ascertain if self-concept
clarity is a relatively stable individual difference or trait and,
more specifically, if it is one that can be reliably captured in
self-reports. That is, would individuals whose self-perceptions
lacked Parity be sufficiently aware of their status to report it,
and would these self-reports remain stable over time? A further
aim, given the established empirical connection between clarity
and self-esteem, was to determine if trait measures of clarity
and self-esteem could be reliably differentiated from one another in self-reports.
Thisfirstgoal does not in any way deny the validity or utility
of conceptualizing clarity, self-esteem, or any other component
of the self-concept as a state (e.g., the dynamic or working self-

concept Markus & Wurf, 1987; identity images, Schlenker,
1985). In Conley's (1984) terms, self-concept clarity is a "selfopinion"—a type of individual difference that is useful to assess
both as a state and as a trait because, although it is susceptible
to environmental influences, it also exhibits high levels of temporal stability (Conley argued that, with time lags longer than
10 years, self-opinions are less stable than intelligence and personality traits). This dual nature of individual differences in
self-opinion is, in fact, highlighted in the postulated interplay
among clarity, temporary levels of self-esteem, and the working
self-concept in theoretical accounts of the self-esteem literature
(eg., Campbell & Lavallee, 1993).
A second goal was to explore the nomological network of the
clarity construct by examining its relations with other personality dispositions. The other traits we examined were based on
the Big Five model of personality, which is currently the model
of choice for measurement of normal-range trait dimensions,
owing to its demonstrated comprehensiveness (Briggs, 1992;
Goldberg, 1990,1993; Wiggins & Trapnell, in press). We anticipated that clarity would be related to Neuroticism, Conscientiousness, and Extraversion (to avoid redundancy, we postpone
describing the theoretical rationale for these relations until the
General Discussion) and that empirically demonstrating these
relations might yield benefits comparable to those that have
emerged in the self-esteem literature.
A third, related goal was to examine the relation between clarity
and chronic attention to the self (i.e., self-consciousness). It has
been argued that higher levels of self-attention should result in a
more clearly articulated self-schema (e.g., Buss, 1980). A number
of studies have supported this proposition (e.g., Kernis & Grannemann, 1988; Nasby, 1985, 1989; Scheiei; Buss, & Buss, 1978)
and, consistent with this generally positive view of self-attention,
there are also studies showing that self-consciousness may buffer
the adverse effects of stressful life events (e.g., Mullen & Suls,
1982; Suls& Fletcher, 1985;cf.Frone&McFarlin, 1989).Amore
negative view of self-attention, however, is suggested by the close
associations among self-focus, negative affective states, and psychopathology. In his review, Ingram (1990) found elevated levels
of self-focus to be such a universal feature of psychopathological
states and disorders that he concluded "the apparent ubiquitousness of this process in disorder makes it difficult tofindanything
dysfunctional that is not accompanied by increased self-focused
attention" (p. 156). Other research suggests that negative mood is
associated with, and may in fact cause, increases in self-focused
attention (Wood, Saltzberg, & Goldsamt, 1990; cf. Salovey, 1992).
These two lines of evidence imply a "self-absorption paradox"
with respect to psychological adjustment: Despite their higher levels of psychological distress and pathology, self-focused individuals
possess a clearer better articulated self-structure than do less selffocused individuals. Although this pattern is consistent with the
"sadder but wiser" phenomenon noted in the literature (Alloy &
Abramson, 1988), it stands in direct contradiction to the positive
clarity-self-esteem relation (Campbell, 1990), as well as to research showing that people high in self-consciousness are more
susceptible to external cues and feedback (Hull, Van Treuren,
Ashford, Propsom, & Andrus, 1988).
In an effort to shed some light on these contradictory findings,
we examined clarity's relations with a number of scales that
measure dispositional self-focused attention. The most widely

143

This document is copyrighted by the American Psychological Association or one of its allied publishers.
This article is intended solely for the personal use of the individual user and is not to be disseminated broadly.

SELF-CONCEPT CLARITY

used taxonomy of disposition a I self-consciousness (Buss, 1980)
is operationalized by the Public and Private Self-Consciousness
Scales (Fenigstein, Scheier, & Buss, 1975). The Public scale taps
attentiveness to or awareness of one's external self (the self as a
social object), whereas the Private scale taps attentiveness to or
awareness of one's inner thoughts, feelings, and attitudes. The
unidimensionality of the Private scale, however, has been questioned by studies (Bumkrant & Page, 1984; Gould, 1986; Lennox & Welch, 1987; Mittal & Balsubramanian, 1987; Piliavin
& Charag, 1988) showing two distinct factors (but see Britt,
1992; Bernstein, Teng, & Garbin, 1986, for arguments against
splitting the Private scale into two factors), factors usually referred to as Self-Reflectiveness (PRIV-SR) and Internal State
Awareness (PRIV-ISA). PRIV-SR consists of six items, including "I'm always trying tofiguremyself out" and "I reflect about
myself a lot." PRIV-ISA consists of four items, including "I'm
aware of the way my mind works when I work through a problem" and "I'm alert to changes in my mood." We examined
clarity's relation with the two factors separately (in addition to
the total scale) because, although low clarity could plausibly
lead individuals to engage in frequent self-analysis (to try to
"figure themselves out"), it could also be associated with a perceived lack of awareness of one's internal states, moods, and
feelings.
We also used a second taxonomy of dispositional self-attentiveness recently proposed by Trapnell and Campbell (1995).
This model distinguishes two motivational states presumed to
direct attention toward the self: curiosity and anxiety. The Reflection-Rumination Questionnaire (RRQ) was developed to
measure individual differences in these two motivationally distinct varieties of self-consciousness. The Reflection scale measures a voluntary, emotionally positive form of self-focus associated with epistemic interest in the self (e.g., "I love exploring
my 'inner* self"). The Rumination scale measures an involuntary, emotionally negative form of self-focus associated with
threat or uncertainty ("Sometimes it is hard for me to shut off
thoughts about myself"). Scale development and validation is
reported elsewhere (Trapnell & Campbell, 1995), but we note
here that Reflection and Rumination (a) are relatively independent forms of self-consciousness (r < .25), (b) correlate equally
highly with the PRIV-SR subscale (rs > .50), (c) correlate in
opposite directions with the PRIV-ISA subscale, and (d) are associated with different Big Five dimensions—Reflection is related to Openness (r > .60), and Rumination is related to Neuroticism(/-> .60).
A final research goal was to explore cultural boundaries of
the SCC construct. Markus and Kitayama (1991) argued that
people from Western and Eastern cultures have strikingly
different construals of the self. The Western (or independent)
construal views the self as an independent, self-contained, autonomous entity. The self has a unique and stable configuration
of internal attributes that governs the individual's behavior
across situations. The Eastern (or interdependent) construal
views the self as an interconnected entity that is most meaningful when cast within an interpersonal context. Internal attributes are seen as situation specific and, to the extent that there
is a recognition of invariant attributes, they tend not to be
viewed as diagnostic of the self but as aspects to be controlled or
regulated to achieve harmony with others.

SCC is a construct that appears closely aligned with the Western construal of the self—the independent, but not the interdependent, self should possess a clearly denned, consistent set of
internal attributes that remain stable across situations. To investigate this possibility, we measured clarity and self-esteem in
Canadian and Japanese samples with the expectations that (a)
Canadians would exhibit higher average levels of clarity, and
(b) because clarity captures characteristics that are normatively
prescribed only in Western cultures, a more pronounced association between clarity and self-esteem would be found among
Canadians.
Overview of the Research
In Study 1 we report the development of the SCC Scale and
examine its associations with self-esteem, the Big Five personality dimensions, and different forms of self-focused attention.
Assessing the convergent, divergent, and construct validity of a
scale consists of demonstrating that the pattern of correlations
with measures of other constructs conforms to (a) the definition
or conceptual specification of the construct and (b) theoretical
propositions regarding psychological antecedents and consequences of the construct (Wiggins, 1973). Therefore, this study
expands the nomological network of the clarity construct but
also serves to establish the SCC Scale's validity to the extent
that the pattern of correlations adheres to theoretical expectations. A second aspect of validity is external or criterion validity,
the extent to which test scores relate to nontest manifestations
of the construct in a theoretically consistent manner (Wiggins,
1973). We examined the SCC Scale's external validity in Study
2, in which we used SCC scores to predict the internal consistency and temporal stability of self-descriptions. In Study 3 we
explored cultural boundaries of the clarity construct by contrasting SCC scores and the SCC-self-esteem correlation in Canadian and Japanese samples.
Study 1

Method
Participants
Three samples of undergraduates enrolled in introductory psychology classes at the University of British Columbia completed a battery of
personality instruments. In Study la we tested 471 participants whose
ages ranged from 17 to 44 (M = 19.11, SD = 2.51). Of those who indicated their sex, 167 were male and 295 were female. Study 1b included
608 participants, whose ages ranged from 17 to 42 (M = 19.37, 5 0 =
2,55); 262 were male and 328 were female. In Study 1c there were 465
participants, whose ages ranged from 17to48(M= 19.61,52)= 3.15);
138 were male and 312 were female. All participants received extra
course credit for participation.

Measures
Studies 1 a-1 c were conducted in each of 3 consecutive years. Because
they differed in the content of the test batteries administered, we note
below which studies contained each measure. Unless otherwise noted,
participants responded to all scale items on 5-point Likert scales anchored by strongly disagree (1) and strongly agree (5).
SCC. The Study la battery contained an initial pool of 40 items
designed to measure clarity. Some of the items assessed the perceived

This document is copyrighted by the American Psychological Association or one of its allied publishers.
This article is intended solely for the personal use of the individual user and is not to be disseminated broadly.

144

CAMPBELL ET AL.

tors (e.g., Burakrant & Page, 1984): The Public scale was unidimencertainty, temporal stability, and internal consistency of self-beliefs,
sional, but the Private scale divided into the two expected factors: PRIVwhereas others tapped fairly direct ramifications of SCC, such as deciSR (6 items) and PRIV-ISA (4 items). We derived PRIV-SR and PRIVsiveness and clearly articulated goals. The initial 40-item pool was genISA subscores by summing responses to the 6 and 4 items, respectively.
erated both by culling (and sometimes revising) items from published
In Studies lband Ic, participants also completed the RRQ(TrapnelI&
scales measuring related constructs (e.g., Rosenberg's [ 1965 ] Self-ConCampbell, 1995).
cept Stability Scale) and by constructing new items. The test batteries
Other measures. We administered the Marlowe-Crowne Social Deadministered in Studies lb and Ic contained a 20-item subset of the
sirability Scale (MC; Crowne & Marlowe, 1960), 25 true-false items,
original item pool.
in Studies la and Ic to evaluate the extent to whichresponsesto the
Self-esteem. We included two measures of self-esteem in Study la:
SCC Scale were associated with socially desirable response tendencies.
the Rosenberg (1965) Self-Esteem Scale, which taps generalized, global
In Study 1 a, participants also rated themselves on 16 adjectives, each
feelings of self-worth, and the Texas Social Behavior Inventory (TSBI;
representing a label for 1 of the 16 sectors of Wiggins's (1979) circumHelmreich, Stapp, & Ervin, 1974), which focuses on social self-esteem
plex model of interpersonal traits. We used these pretest ratings in Study
or perceived social competence. Studies lb and 1c included only the
2, in which we examined the temporal stability of participants' selfRosenberg scale.
descriptions.
Big Five measures. In Studies lb and Ic we measured the Big Five
personality factors with the NEO-FFI (Costa & McCrae, 1989), a 60item short form version of the NEO Personality Inventory (Costa &
Results
McCrae, 1985). Reliability and validity evidence for the FFI is impressive, with thefive12-item FFI scales accounting for approximately 75%
We focus first on the data relevant to the development and
of the variance in convergent criteria of the full NEO-PI (Costa &
reliability of the SCC Scale. Then we examine the correlations
McCrae, 1989).
between the SCC Scale and measures of the other constructs.
The Positive and Negative Affect Schedule (PANAS; Watson, Clark,
Finally, we report regression analyses, which provide a portrait
&Tellegen, 1988)consistsof20adjectives, 10 that measure the disposiof the independent personality concomitants of clarity.
tional mood dimension of negative affectivity (NA; e.g., nervous, hostile, ashamed), and 10 that measure positive affectivity (PA; e.g., proud,
SCC Scale
enthusiastic, inspired). Watson and Tellegen (1985) identified NA and
PA as the most superordinate dimensions of emotional experience.
From the initial pool, we selected 20 items on the basis of
Strong relations between NA and Neuroticism and between PA and Exinternal
consistency and lack of item redundancy. This original
traversion (Meyer & Shack, 1989; Watson & Clark, 1992) have led some
20-item scale (reported in Campbell, Katz, Lavallee, & Traptheorists to propose that Neuroticism and Extraversion be relabeled
Negative Emotionality and Positive Emotionality (Tellegen, 1985; Tel- nell, 1991) contained three highly intercorrelated factors
(average r = .52) reflecting generalized clarity, goal-directlegen & Waller, in press).
edness, and decisiveness. We subsequently decided that a
Scales measuring selected aspects of neuroticism also were adminisshorter, unidimensional scale focusing specifically on the epistered. We included the Taylor Manifest Anxiety Scale (TMAS; Taylor,
temological status of the self-concept was preferable on both
1953) in Studies laand Ic, the Beck Depression Inventory (BDI; Beck,
1967) in Studies lband Ic, and a short version of the Repression-Sentheoretical and practical grounds. Our reasoning was that alsitization Scale (R-S: Byrne, 1961) in Study Ic. The TMAS is a truethough decisiveness and goal directedness are certainly logical
false questionnaire consisting of 50 items from the Minnesota
manifestations of clarity, both represent broad constructs of
Multiphasic Personality Inventory (MMPI; Hathaway & McKinley,
their own and share many features with a large number of other
1951) selected on the basis of face validity to measure manifest trait
important trait constructs (e.g., dominance, conscientiousness,
anxiety. The scale is alternatively considered one of the best available
vocational identity). Because inclusion of such items might unmarkers of NA or neuroticism (Watson & Clark, 1984). We used a 20necessarily complicate interpretations of the SCC Scale and its
item short form version of the TMAS developed by Bendig (1956) in
associations, we opted to keep the item set brief and as concepStudy Ic instead of the original 50-item scale. The BD1 is a 21-item
tually univocal as possible. We therefore retained only those 12
measure of depression that has been widely used with college populaitems that loaded on thefirstfactor. The retained items tap pertions (e.g., Alloy & Abramson, 1982). The R-S Scale consists of truefalse MMPI items selected on the basis of face validity to operationalize
ceived internal consistency and temporal stability of self-beliefs,
the trait of repression-sensitization, the tendency to cognitively avoid
along with more generic self-certainty items.1 Table I shows the
versus approach threatening perceptions, thoughts, and feelings (Bell &
12 items selected for the final scale, along with the average factor
Byrne, 1978; Gordon, 1957). We used a 43-item short form version
loadings (principal-components analysis) and the average corconstructed by Paulhus and Levitt (1983), who reported alpha reliabilrected item-total correlations. Table 2 shows the scale statistics
ities and a factor structure based on the combined-sex sample closely
for each of the three separate samples.
resembling that reported for the original R-S scale.
Internal consistency. The average alpha reliability coeffiFinally, the Study Ic battery included an 18-item short form version
cient was. 86 (Table 2). The combined-sample corrected itemof the Need for Cognition Scale (NCOG; Cacioppo, Petty, & Kao,
total correlations ranged from .35 to .66, with an average item1984), which measures the tendency to engage in and enjoy thinking
total correlation of .54 (Table 1). An examination of the com(Cacioppo & Petty, 1982), a construct that overlaps with the Big Five
Openness dimension. The 18-item short form, constructed from factor
and psychometric analyses of the original scale, may be a less problem1
atic measure of the construct than the longer version, which has been
Item 12 contains both decisiveness and goal-directedness content,
criticized for its multidimensionality.
but we retained it because it loaded most heavily on thefirstfactor. For
Self-consciousness. We administered the Self-Consciousness Scale
investigators who have used the original 20-item scale, the correlations
(Fenigsteinetal., 1975) in all three studies. Factor analyses in our own
reported in Studies 1 and 2 are highly similar to those obtained with the
earlier version of the scale.
samples consistently replicated the results reported by other investiga-

145

SELF-CONCEPT CLARITY

This document is copyrighted by the American Psychological Association or one of its allied publishers.
This article is intended solely for the personal use of the individual user and is not to be disseminated broadly.

Table 1
Structural Coefficients and Descriptive Statistics for Self-Concept Clarity Scale Items
Item

PCI

1. My beliefs about myself often conflict with one another.1
2. On one day I might have one opinion of myself and on another day I might have a different opinion.*
3. I spend a lot of time wondering about what kind of person I really am."
4. Sometimes I feel that I am not really the person that I appear to be.*
5. When I think about the kind of person I have been in the past, I'm not sure what I was really like."
6. 1 seldom experience conflict between the different aspects of my personality.
7. Sometimes 1 think I know other people better than I know myself."
8. My beliefs about myself seem to change very frequently.8
9. If I were asked to describe my personality, my description might end up being different from one day
to another day.*
10. Even if I wanted to, I don't think I would tell someone what I'm really like."
11. In general, I have a clear sense of who I am and what I am.
12. It is often hard for me to make up my mind about things because 1 don't really know what I want.*

75
68
65
70
62
43
58
76
68
49

66
56

M

SD

.66
.57
.56
.61
.52
.35
.48
.66

3.57
3.07
3.07
3.16
3.55
3.08
3.39
3.61

0.97
1.14
1.20
1.14
1.04
1.07
1.17
1.02

.58
.41
.57
.47

3.58

1.12
1.18
0.99
1.21

3.42
3.61
2.97

Note. N = 1,544. Scale ranges from 1 (strongly disagree) to 5 (strongly agree). PC 1 = loading on first unrotated principal component; rjt - corrected
item-total correlation.
• Reverse-keyed item.

bined-sample interitem correlation matrix revealed that all of
the items were positively intercorrelated, with correlations
ranging from .10 to .58, and a mean interitem correlation of .34
(Table 2). The alphas, item-total correlations, and interitem
correlations all indicate high levels of internal consistency, and
there was very little variability in these statistics across the three
samples.
Evidence for a general factor. In addition to the reliability
data, factor analyses of the 12 items yielded strong evidence of a
single, general factor. Principal-components and maximum-likelihood factor analyses in each sample typically yielded only one
factor with an eigenvalue greater than 1.0. Although some analyses did yield a second factor with eigenvalues of approximately
1.0, the items that comprised this second factor replicated neither
across samples nor across solutions. In each sample, every item
loaded positively on thefirstunrotated factor, with a minimum
item loading of .34, and the average correlation between these
loadings in the three samples was .84. In the combined sample,
all items had loadings greater than .45 (Table 1). A scree test also
supported the unidimensionality of the scale. In the combined
sample, thefirstfactor accounted for 41% of the total variance,
with the second factor accounting for only 8%.
Test-retest reliability. We readministered the scale to 155
Study la participants after a 4-month interval and to 61 Study
lc participants after a 5-month interval. Despite the relatively

long intervals, the test-retest correlations of .79 and .70, respectively (Table 2), revealed high levels of temporal stability.
Scale distributions. Table 2 shows the SCC Scale means,
standard deviations, and information relevant to sex and age
differences for each of the three samples. The overall scale mean
decreased across the three samples, indicating that in the 3-year
time period participants exhibited somewhat lower levels of
clarity. Although these differences could reflect a form of scale
unreliability (i.e., sensitivity to variations in the number or type
of other scale items included in the test battery), there are reasons to doubt this interpretation. First, in Studies lb and lc we
constructedfivedifferent forms of each test battery in which we
systematically varied the location of the SCC items within the
test battery. Analyses of variance indicated that SCC scores
were invariant over thefiveforms of the batteries (both Fs < 1).
Second, scores on the other scales also indicated that the three
samples tended to exhibit generally higher levels of psychological distress across time. For example, self-esteem scores declined, and depression and neuroticism scores increased, over
the 3-year period. Taken together, these data suggest that the
decrease in SCC scores across studies may reflect an historical
trend in our samples rather than scale unreliability.2
2

The decrease in SCC means over the 3-year period may reflect the
steadily increasing proportion of Asian students at the University of

Table 2
Scale Statistics:Study 1
N

Total

Males

Interitem r

Females

Study'

Total

Fern

M

SD

M

SD

M

SD

X

Range

Test-retest r

a

la
lb
lc

464
595
456

295
328
312

42.12
39.68
38.86

8.19
8.16
8.06

42.93
40.18
40.24

8.29
7.71
7.52

41.67
39.27
38.25

i3.11
13.49
i3.23

.34
.34
.32

.15-.57
.10-. 58
.10-. 56

.79

.86
.86
.85

.70

Note. The test-retest correlation in Study la is based on 155 participants and a 4-month interval. The test-retest correlation in Study lc is based
on 61 participants and a 5-month interval. Fem = females.

REF

CAMPBELL ET AL.

Table 2 also shows that women tended to exhibit lower levels
of clarity than men. Although the sex difference was not reliable
in Studies la or lb, it did reach conventional levels of significance in Study lc, F( I, 448) = 5.87, p < .02. This relatively
small, but consistent, sex difference is congruent with prior research that generally reveals somewhat higher levels of neuroticism (Costa & McCrae, 1985), anxiety (Jackson, 1976), and
NA(Woods, Rhodes, &Whelan, 1989) among women.
Finally, SCC scores were weakly correlated with age in all
three studies (rs = .08-. 12). Although the direction of these
correlations is consistent with an expected developmental trend
of higher levels of self-concept articulation or clarity with increasing age, the present samples do not contain adequate age
variability to constitute a reasonable test of this trend.
Social desirability. The SCC Scale was moderately correlated with the MC Scale administered in Studies la and lc; rs
- .32 and .33, respectively. The extent to which correlations
with the MC Scale reflect social desirability response bias or
substantive personality trait variance in the MC Scale continues
to be a contentious issue but one that is beyond the scope of
the present investigation (see Paulhus, 1991). Nonetheless, the
magnitude of the SCC-MC correlations is highly similar to
those that we obtained between the MC Scale and a number of
other measures, including self-esteem, Neuroticism, Conscientiousness, and Agreeableness.

rr

s

g tt "c '5 ^

O m

PUB

-.29
-.24
-.29

ISA

Sel!F-consc

l" \

O <N —

Q " 5

s

— oo O

g r rr
i/-i

r^

-^f

UJ £

-.38
-.20
-.23

PRV

w G C
C Q ra

s

.20

U

z

a

OS

OH

0

u

r

Con

o

r^ ao

I .i g g ^
w

I i W ~ -~

S "^

EXT

S II rr rr ^ "S

«§oo" 8
cCJ
UJZUJ
< *
S
dZ
cj ^^
^* ^^W
« S
O

w

?? *

-.49
-.48
-.62

TAY

Neur

BDI

-.63

en

UJ

-.61

a.

(' (*

Z

™ O CT>

ROS

z

TEX

w

Study

British Columbia during this period, but we were unable to test this
possibility because we did not collect information on ethnic background in Study 1 (see Study 3 for cultural differences in SCC).

Agr

Personality Correlates of SCC
Table 3 contains the zero-order correlations between the SCC
Scale and the other measures. To facilitate interpretation of
these correlations, we grouped in Table 3 scales that are theoretically (and empirically) associated with a common underlying dimension. For example, we placed the NEO-FFI Neuroticism Scale, the NA Scale, the TMAS, the BD1, and the R-S
Scale together under the common label of neuroticism (McCrae
& Costa, L987; Watson & Clark, 1984). We also grouped the
scales that focus on dispositional self-attention or selfconsciousness.
Self-esteem, The SCC Scale was substantially correlated
with the measures of self-esteem (average r - .61); people
higher in clarity were higher in self-esteem. Because these correlations replicate the results of earlier studies that used unobtrusive measures of clarity (Baumgardner, 1990; Campbell,
1990), they provide evidence for the SCC Scale's construct
validity.
Neuroticism. Our expectation that clarity would be substantially correlated with Neuroticism or NA also was confirmed. The SCC Scale exhibited strong negative correlations
with the NA Scale (average r = -.50), the NEO-FFI Neuroticism Scale (average r = -.64), the TMAS (average r - -.61),
the BDI (average r = -.49), and the R-S Scale {r = -.63).
Other Big Five dimensions. The SCC Scale exhibited fairly
substantial correlations with the NEO-FFI Conscientiousness
scale, indicating that people higher in clarity were more consci-

S& «

C « c

Table 3
SCC Correlatesr; Study 1

This document is copyrighted by the American Psychological Association or one of its allied publishers.
This article is intended solely for the personal use of the individual user and is not to be disseminated broadly.

146

? «

•I o I

This document is copyrighted by the American Psychological Association or one of its allied publishers.
This article is intended solely for the personal use of the individual user and is not to be disseminated broadly.

SELF-CONCEPT CLARITY

entious. The scale was also moderately associated with Extraversion (the correlations were somewhat more pronounced
with the PA scale than with the NEO-FFI Extraversion scale)—
people higher in clarity were more extraverted. In addition,
there were moderate correlations with the NEO-FFI Agreeableness dimension such that high clarity was associated with
higher levels of Agreeableness. Finally, the SCC Scale was uncorrelated with the NEO-FFI Openness to Experience scale
(average r = -.01), but it was correlated with the NCOG Scale
(r = .20), suggesting that people with more certain self-concepts
may engage in or enjoy thinking more than their low-clarity
counterparts.
Self-consciousness. We distinguished between two subtypes
of private self-consciousness: chronic self-analysis (PRIV-SR)
and internal state awareness (PRIV-ISA) and between two motivationally distinct varieties of private self-consciousness: reflection and rumination. The PRIV-SR and PRIV-ISA subscales
of the Private Self-Consciousness Scale were relatively independent of one another (average r = .26), as were the scores on
the RRQ Reflection and Rumination scales (average r = .22).
However, the Reflection and Rumination Scales were both
highly correlated with the PRIV-SR subscale (average rs = .52
and .51, respectively), suggesting that a tendency toward
chronic self-analysis might be equally likely to reflect epistemic
interest in the self or anxious preoccupation with the self.
SCC had a moderate correlation with the total Private SelfConsciousness Scale (average r = .27). However, an inspection
of the two Private subscales revealed that whereas SCC had a
strong negative correlation with the Self-Reflection subscale
(average r = -.43), it had a small positive correlation with the
Internal State Awareness Subscale (average r = .15). This pattern suggests that individuals with more confused self-concepts
have a greater tendency toward chronic self-analysis but may be
somewhat less attuned to their internal states than people with
more clearly articulated self-schemas.
Relations with the RRQ yielded another divergence. Although SCC had a strong inverse correlation with the Rumination scale (average r = -.52), it was only weakly related to the
Reflection scale (average r - -.12). These correlations further
suggest that the high levels of self-analysis exhibited by people
low in clarity are not particularly motivated by intellectual curiosity about themselves but take the form of affectively negative, intrusive self-relevant thoughts.
Finally, the SCC Scale was moderately, negatively correlated
with the Public Self-Consciousness Scale (average r = -.26),
suggesting that people with more confused self-concepts may be
more sensitive to or concerned about how their behaviors are
viewed and evaluated by others.

Regression Analyses
Although the zero-order correlations provide some insight
into the potential concomitants of self-concept clarity, some of
the personality traits we measured are correlated with one another (e.g., self-esteem is substantially negatively correlated
with neuroticism or NA; Watson & Clark, 1984). Therefore, it
was theoretically important to ascertain the extent to which
these traits exhibited associations with clarity that were independent of their associations with other traits. For example,

147

does clarity still appear to be an important concomitant of selfesteem after controlling for the fact that both clarity and selfesteem are negatively associated with Neuroticism?
To address this issue in Studies lb and lc, we regressed SCC
scores on the Rosenberg Self-Esteem Scale, the Big Five dimensions as assessed by the NEO-FFI scores, and thefivemeasures
of self-consciousness (the Private Self-Consciousness Scale was
not included because it is redundant with the Self-Reflection
and Internal State Awareness subscales). Study la did not include the full complement of measures, but we undertook a
somewhat comparable analysis with these data by regressing the
Rosenberg Self-Esteem Scale, the TMAS (Neuroticism), the
Positive Affectivity scale (Extraversion), and the three available
self-consciousness scores (PRIV-SR, PRIV-ISA, and Public
Self-Consciousness) on SCC scores.
The regression analyses accounted for 56%, 56%, and 52% of
the variance in SCC scores in Studies la-lc, respectively. The
pattern of associations (the beta weights are shown in Table 4)
was remarkably consistent across the three samples. Clarity was
independently associated with higher levels of self-esteem, lower
levels of Neuroticism or NA,3 lower levels of self-reflection or
chronic self-analysis, and higher levels of internal state awareness in all three samples. It was also independently associated
with lower levels of rumination, higher levels of Conscientiousness, and higher levels of Agreeableness in the two samples that
included these measures. The beta weights associated with public self-consciousness, Openness to Experience, and self-focused attention motivated by intellectual curiosity (the RRQ
Reflection scale) were consistently small and nonsignificant.
The only trait that failed to show a consistent pattern across
samples was Extraversion, which exhibited a nonsignificant
positive beta weight in Study la, a near-zero beta weight in
Study lb, and a significant negative beta weight in Study lc.4
Although we treated SCC scores as the criterion variable in
these regressions for ease of presentation, the results do not necessarily imply that the significant predictor traits cause differences in clarity. Indeed, regression analyses in which each of the
reliable predictors was treated as the criterion variable yielded
comparable results. For example, when self-esteem was treated
as the criterion variable, the SCC Scale accounted for significant incremental variance in self-esteem after controlling for
the variance accounted for by all of the remaining traits. Therefore, the regression results should be viewed as showing that
clarity is either an independent cause or an independent consequence of those traits that yielded reliable beta weights.
3

Although we reported the FFI Neuroticism Scale in the regressions
(because the FFI was used to assess the other Big Five dimensions),
replacing the FFI scale with another "neuroticism" measure (e.g., the
NA Scale of the PANAS) yielded very similar results. The various measures of Neuroticism, however, were redundant with one another in that
if any one of them was entered into the regression, the others made no
reliable contribution.
4
Given the known overlap between clarity and self-esteem, we also
computedfirst-orderpartial correlations controlling for self-esteem. All
of the reliable zero-order correlations reported in Table 3 remained significant, with the following two exceptions: The correlations with both
measures of Extraversion (PA and FFI Extraversion scales) and the
NCOG Scale approached 0.

148

CAMPBELL ET AL.

This document is copyrighted by the American Psychological Association or one of its allied publishers.
This article is intended solely for the personal use of the individual user and is not to be disseminated broadly.

Table 4
Regression of Self-Esteem, Big Five Dimension, and SelfConsciousness on SCC Scores: Beta Weigkts
Predictor

Study la

Study lb

Study lc

Self-Esteem
Neuroticism
PRIV-Self-Reflection
PRIV-Intemal State Awareness
Rumination
Conscientiousness
Agreeableness
Extraversion
Public Self-Consciousness
Openness
Reflection

.35***

.24***
-.23***
-.15**
.14**
-.13**
.18***
.07*
-.02
-.04
-.03

.31***
-.20***
-.16**
.14**
-.15**
.11**
.09*
-.12**
-.03

-.31***
.10**
—
—
—
.07

-.01
—
—

.03

.00

-.03

Note. Self-esteem = Rosenberg Self-Esteem Scale; Neuroticism =
Taylor Manifest Anxiety Scale (Study la) and NEO-FFI Neuroticism
Scale (Studies lb and lc); PRIV-Self-Reflection - Self-Reflection subscale of the Private Self-Consciousness Scale (PRIV); PRJV-Internal
State Awareness = Internal State Awareness subscale of the PRIV; Rumination = Rumination subscale of the Reflection-Rumination Questionnaire (RRQ); Conscientiousness = NEO-FFI Conscientiousness
scale; Agreeableness = NEO-FFI Agreeableness scale; Extraversion =
Positive Affectivity subscale of the Positive and Negative Affect Schedule
(Study la) and NEO-FFI Extraversion scale (Studies 1 b and lc); Public
Self-Consciousness = Public Self-Consciousness Scale; Openness =
NEO-FFI Openness to Experience scale; Reflection = Reflection subscale of the RRQ.
* p < .05, two-tailed. ** p < .01, two-tailed. ***/?< .001, two-tai led.

No mention was made of Study la, and participants were selected without regard to SCC scores. However, given the established relation between self-esteem and clarity (Campbell, 1990), we ensured that approximately half the participants fell above, and half below, the median
on the Rosenberg Self-Esteem Scale. This procedure yielded a sample
of 48 men and 107 women whose SCC scores averaged 29.07, a mean
nearly identical to that of the full Study 1 a sample (29.88).

Procedure and Materials
Participants reported in groups of 2-4 but undertook the tasks in
individual cubicles. Theyfirstrated themselves on 16 adjectives, each of
which represented a label for 1 of the 16 sectors of the interpersonal
circumplex (Wiggins, 1979). Because participants had made these
same ratings 4 months earlier in Study la, the ratings allowed us to
assess the temporal stability of their self-descriptions. We assessed the
internal consistency of self-descriptions by asking participants to make
me-not me decisions for 56 adjectives, within which were embedded 25
pairs of opposites (e.g.. careless-careful, timid-bold). The adjectives
were presented by a computer (presentation order was randomized for
each participant), and participants were instructed to press the "y" key
if they believed that the adjective described them and to press the "n"
key if it did not. Internal consistency was operationalized as the number
of pairs that elicited a consistent response pattern {me to one adjective
and not me to its opposite). Finally,we readministered the SCC Scale
to participants to assess the sealers temporal stability (these results are
reported in Table 2).

Results and Discussion
Discussion
The results of Study 1 suggest that clarity is a relatively stable
trait that can be captured by means of self-reports. The SCC
Scale exhibited excellent reliability, both in terms of its internal
consistency and temporal stability. The study also provided initial evidence for the scale's validity. Although we postpone a
substantive discussion of the personality concomitants of clarity
until the General Discussion, the pattern of correlations was
generally consistent with prior research (e.g., the self-esteemclarity relation) and with the theoretical description of the construct (e.g., low clarity was associated with chronic selfanalysis ). Another important form of validity, however, not addressed in Study 1, is criterion validity. Therefore, we turn to
Study 2, which we designed to demonstrate the validity of the
SCC Scale using unobtrusive, naturalistic indicators of clarity
as opposed to scores on other self-report measures.
Study 2
Previous research (e.g., Campbell, 1990) that examined the
self-esteem-clarity relation used unobtrusive measures of clarity, including the temporal stability and the internal consistency
of participants' self-descriptions. In Study 2, we used these two
indicators of clarity to assess the criterion validity of the SCC
Scale.

Method
Participants
We recruited a subset of participants (N = 155) who participated in
Study la 4 months later for a study concerned with "self-descriptions."

We calculated three measures of temporal stability for each participant from the two sets of ratings on the 16 circumplex adjectives: (a) the number of adjectives that exhibited any change in
rating (NCHG); (b) the average absolute difference between each
of the 16 ratings (ABDIFF); and (c) the within-subject correlation
(Fisher's r-Xo-z transformation) between the two sets of ratings
(CORR). The first two measures, which assess the extent to which
participants changed their ratings between the two testing occasions, were highly correlated with one another (r = .74), and the
two change measures were negatively correlated with CORR, the
rank order similarity in the two sets of ratings (average r = —.67).
The internal consistency measure, however, was only slightly related to the temporal stability measures (average r = -.08 with the
two change measures, and r - .09 with the rank-order measure).
The correlations between the SCC Scale and the internal consistency and temporal stability measures were all reliable and in the
expected direction (see Table 5). Participants high in clarity exhibited more consistent responses on the me-not me rating task (r
= .31), and their ratings on the circumplex adjectives changed less
(average r = -.31) and were more similarly rank ordered (r ~
.38).
Correlations with the other Study la personality variables also
are shown in Table 5, The pattern of these correlations corresponds quite closely with the direction and strength of the associations between these other personality measures and the SCC Scale.
Low self-esteem and high Neuroticism were associated with lower
levels of internal consistency and temporal stability. Extraversion
(low), PRIV-SR, and public self-consciousness exhibited similar,
but weaker, patterns. PRIV-ISA was relatively independent of the
criterion variables.
To assess the unique contribution of the SCC Scale in predicting

149

SELF-CONCEPT CLARITY
Table 5
Correlations Between Study la Personality Variables and the Internal Consistency
and Temporal Stability of Participants' Self-Descriptions
Temporal stability
Personality variable

This document is copyrighted by the American Psychological Association or one of its allied publishers.
This article is intended solely for the personal use of the individual user and is not to be disseminated broadly.

Self-concept clarity
Self-esteem
Neuroticism
Extra version
Self-reflection
Internal state awareness
Public self-consciousness

Internal
consistency

NCHG

ABDIFF

CORR

-.27***
-.24**
.29***
-.12

-.28***

-.34***
-.23**
.28***
-.20*
.16*

.04

.03

-.18*

.26**

-.04
.19*

.38***
.37***
-.40***
.28***
-.17*
-.06
-.22**

.31***
.19*
-.27***
.14

.07

Note. NCHG = number of adjectives that exhibited any change in rating; ABDIFF = average absolute
difference between each rating; CORR = within-subject correlation between the two sets of ratings; Selfconcept clarity = Self-Concept Clarity Scale; Self-esteem = Rosenberg Self-Esteem Scale; Neuroticism =
Taylor Manifest Anxiety Scale; Extraversion = Positive Affectivity subscale of the Positive and Negative
Affect Schedule; Self-reflection = Self-Reflection subscale of the Private Self-Consciousness Scale (PRIV);
Internal state awareness = Internal State Awareness subscale of the PRIV; Public self-consciousness =
Public Self-Consciousness Scale.
*p< .05,two-tailed. **p< .01,two-tailed. •**p< .001, two-tailed.

the criterion variables, we conducted hierarchical regression analyses using a multiple-act criterion. The criterion consisted of an
unweighted combination of the internal consistency score, one of
the change scores (NCHG), and the rank-order score (CORR),
derived by first standardizing and then summing the three scores.
In the first analysis, we entered the SCC score and then tested for
the incremental variance accounted for by the other personality
variables. The SCC score accounted for 22% of the variance, F( 1,
139) = 39.58, p < .001; the six other variables, tested either as a
group (5% incremental variance; F[6, 133] = 1.46, ns), or individually, did not account for a significant proportion of incremental variance (public self-consciousness was marginally significant,
2% incremental variance; F[l, 133] = 3.51,/? < .07). In the second analysis, wefirstentered the other six variables and then tested
for the incremental variance of the SCC Scale, The SCC Scale
accounted for 6% of the variance after controlling for the other six
variables, F( 1,133) = 11.42, p < .001.
The results of this study provide good evidence for the external
validity of the SCC Scale. The criterion variables we used, although based on participants' self-reports, were unobtrusive indicators derived from the patterning of these reports either within
testing occasions (the internal consistency measure) or across testing occasions (the temporal stability measures). The disadvantage
of such measures is that they contain more extraneous variance, a
feature that reduces their reliability and therefore the overall magnitude of the validity correlations. This disadvantage, however, is
offset by the reduced possibility that the results were affected by
self-presentation or demand characteristics.
Although SCC scores were reliably correlated with both criteria,
the internal consistency and stability measures were only weakly
correlated with one another (albeit in the appropriate direction).
Although further investigation is required, we believe that the low
correlations in this study probably reflect measurement factors. In
addition to the weak reliability of unobtrusive measures, the tasks
used here to assess the two criteria differed on many dimensions
(e.g., different adjectives, binary decisions vs. rating scales). In another study (Campbell, 1995), in which participants were asked

to make me-not-me decisions on the same adjectives on two occasions (2-day interval), correlations between internal consistency
and temporal stability measures were much higher (average r —
.42), It is also possible that these two facets of clarity are not highly
related, because although self-uncertainty should cause inconsistent self-descriptions, "inconsistent" responses may also plausibly
reflect self-concepts that are complex or flexible (I am lazy at
home and hardworking in the office; see Campbell, 1990). Although inconsistency derived from uncertainty should be associated with instability, inconsistency that reflects complexity may
not be.
The correlations between the other personality variables and the
criteria roughly paralleled the extent to which these other variables
were correlated with the SCC Scale. The self-esteem correlations
replicate earlier studies (Campbell, 1990, Studies 2 and 4), and the
Neuroticism correlations are unsurprising given this dimension's
overlap with both clarity and self-esteem. The correlations with
the PRIV-SR and Public Self-Consciousness Scales are more interesting and suggest that two forms of dispositional self-attention—
a tendency to engage in chronic self-analysis and attentiveness to
the self as a social object—are associated with self-concepts that
are inconsistent and unstable.
The SCC Scale exhibited incremental validity in this study; it
accounted for significant variance in the criteria after controlling
for the impact of the other measured traits. Given the high levels
of multicollinearity in the predictors (especially SCC, self-esteem,
and Neuroticism), we view this outcome as somewhat fortuitous
in that rather small changes in some of the zero-order correlations
might have altered the outcome. Incremental criterion validity by
itself, however, is neither a necessary nor a sufficient condition to
establish the scale's validity.
Study 3
Self-concept clarity references a self-construal that is predominant in Western cultures; the self is viewed as an autonomous inviolate entity, containing a unique, clearly articulated

This document is copyrighted by the American Psychological Association or one of its allied publishers.
This article is intended solely for the personal use of the individual user and is not to be disseminated broadly.

150

CAMPBELL ET AL.

set of internal attributes that remain stable across situations
(Markus & Kitayama, 1991). Perhaps it is because the clarity
construct captures the essential characteristics of the self that
are normative in Western culture that it exhibits such substantial correlations with evaluative aspects of the self (e.g., selfesteem) in Canadian samples. The Eastern self, in contrast, is
sustained and formed by its social environment (Markus & Kitayama, 1991), suggesting that situational changes would be associated with changes in the self. Inconsistency in the self, then,
should not challenge the normative view of the Eastern self, suggesting that clarity and self-esteem would not be as strongly as-,
sociated in Eastern samples. To examine this possibility, we
conducted three studies in which we compared mean SCC
scores and SCC-self-esteem correlations in samples of Westernized Canadian and Japanese students. We chose Japanese students as the comparison sample because Japan represents a prototypical Eastern culture (Markus & Kitayama, 1991).

Method
Participants
We compared samples from Japan and Canada in each of three studies. In Study 3a, the Japanese sample consisted of 80 exchange students
from Ritsumeikan University in Kyoto, Japan who had been studying
at the University of British Columbia for approximately 6 months. In
Study 3b, the Japanese data were collected in Japan from introductory
psychology students at Nagasaki University in Nagasaki, Japan (n =
112) and research methods students at Ritsumeikan University {n 84). Because these two samples exhibited similar SCC and self-esteem
scores, they were combined. In Study 3c, the Japanese sample consisted
of 100 exchange students from Ritsumeikan University who had been
in Canada for less than 1 week at the time of testing. Aside from a few
individuals born in other East Asian countries, the Japanese respondents had been born and raised in Japan.
The Canadian data in all three studies were collected from introductory psychology and social psychology classes at the University of British
Columbia. Because the cultural background of the Canadian students
was quite heterogeneous, the samples were reduced to include only
those participants who met all our criteria of a "Westernized Canadian"
sample. The samples include only those participants who: a) were born
in either Canada or the United States; b) had parents that had been born
in Canada, the United States, or in a European country; c) declared
their ethnic descent to be that of a European culture; and d) to keep the
age range comparable to the Japanese samples, were under the age of
25. In Studies 3a-3c, 112, 90, and 82 participants, respectively, met all
these criteria and formed the Westernized Canadian samples, or "Canadians," for short.

Materials
Participants completed questionnaire packets that included the SCC
Scale, Rosenberg's (1965) Self-Esteem Scale, and a number of other
measures not included in the present report.5 The Japanese participants
all completed a Japanese version of the questionnaire. The original English version was translated into Japanese and then back-translated into
English by a second translator to ensure comparability and equivalence
in meaning(Brislin, 1970).

Results and Discussion
We anticipated that (a) the Japanese would exhibit lower scores
on the SCC Scale than their Canadian counterparts, and (b) the

correlation between the SCC and Self-Esteem Scales would be
lower among the Japanese. The average SCC, self-esteem scores,
and the SCC-self-esteem correlations shown in Table 6 indicate
that these expectations were realized in all three samples. The Japanese had lower SCC scores than the Canadians (all ps < .01) and,
consistent with prior research (Bond & Cheung, 1983; Mahler,
1976), they also had lower SE scores. The Canadian samples
yielded substantial correlations between the SCC and Self-Esteem
scales, comparable to those reported earlier in Study 1. The correlations in the Japanese samples were consistently smaller—tests
comparing the correlations between the Japanese and Canadian
samples were significant in Studies 3a and 3c (ps < .01) and marginal in Study 3b(p < .07).
To explore these cultural differences in more detail, we combined the samples from the three studies and conducted comparable analyses on each of the 12 SCC Scale items. The results,
shown in Table 7, indicated that every SCC item exhibited a
more substantial correlation with self-esteem among the Canadians than the Japanese (allps < .05) and that the overall mean
differences in SCC emerged on 10 of the 12 items. The other 2
items showed a nonsignificant reversal, with Canadians exhibiting somewhat lower scores than the Japanese.
The exceptions are informative. One of the reversals is Item
5, which, along with Items 2, 8, and 9, taps the temporal stability of self-beliefs. Item 5 differs from the other stability items in
that it inquires about continuity of the self over a relatively long
time period, whereas the other three items focus on cross-situational consistency over relatively short time periods. Markus
and Kitayama (1991) noted that the interdependent self tends
to accommodate behavior to changing situations in order to
achieve the cultural mandate of connection with others, thereby
suggesting less cross-situational consistency among the Japanese. Situational variability, however, does not necessarily imply a past self that lacks continuity with the present self. It seems
that although our Japanese participants perceived the self to be
less consistent across situations, they did not view this accommodating self as being less continuous over time.
The other item that exhibited a slight reversal was Item 7,
an item that asks participants to compare how well they know
themselves with how well they know other people. Although
speculative, there are a couple of possible explanations for this
reversal. First, it may be that this item reflects cultural differences in perceived knowledge about other people. On other general clarity items, Japanese participants professed to have less
self-knowledge than the Canadians. For example, they were less
likely to endorse the item "In general, I have a clear sense of who
I am and what I am." Given this evidence for lower levels of
perceived self-knowledge, it would seem that the relative reluctance of the Japanese participants to endorse Item 7 could derive from the fact that they also don't believe that they know
other people very well. A second possible explanation for the
reversal is that this item reflects cultural differences in modesty.
Some participants might feel that knowing other people better
than they know themselves is akin to knowing other people es5
A small portion of the Study 3a data reported here is contained in
Heine, Lehman, Okugawa, and Campbell (1992). In addition, the
Study 3b data were derived from participant samples used in Heine and
Lehman (1995).

151

SELF-CONCEPT CLARITY

Table 6
Self-Concept Clarity andSelf-Esteem in Three Samples of Canadian
and Japanese Students: Study 3
N

AfSE

MSCC

CORR

Study

Cdn

Jpn

Cdn

Jpn

Cdn

Jpn

Cdn

Jpn

f| ^ T2

3a
3b
3c

112
90
81

80
188
97

41.72
39.30
38.02

34.41**
35.01**
34.35**

40.32**
39.36**
39.44**

35.35
32.26
35.88

.69**
.63**
.59**

.37**
.46**
.08

;><.001
p < .07
jJ<.001

This document is copyrighted by the American Psychological Association or one of its allied publishers.
This article is intended solely for the personal use of the individual user and is not to be disseminated broadly.

Note. Cdn = Canadians; Jpn = Japanese; SCC = Self-Concept Clarity Scale; SE = Rosenberg Self-Esteem
Scale; CORR = correlation between SE and SCC.
** Mean is less than other culture or correlation is different from 0, p < .01, two-tailed.

pecially well. To the extent that this is true, Japanese may be
hesitant to endorse this item because they are reluctant to believe that they know others so well.
In sum, Study 3 provided consistent support for theoretically
derived predictions about cultural differences in average levels
of clarity and clarity's association with self-esteem. These studies, therefore, not only add to the growing literature documenting cultural variation in construal of self (e.g., Bond & Cheung,
1983; Cousins, 1989; Heine & Lehman, 1995; Mahler, 1976;
Markus & Kitayama, 1991) but also provide, along with Studies
1 and 2, converging evidence for the validity of the SCC Scale.

means of self-reports. To accomplish this goal, we developed
the SCC Scale and examined its psychometric properties, its
relations with measures of other traits, and its predictive associations with unobtrusive indicants of the clarity construct. We
further aimed to expand the nomological network of the clarity
construct, to explore the self-absorption paradox, and to examine clarity's cultural boundaries. We discuss each of these aims
below (data relevant to the last three aims also address the SCC
Scale's validity but to avoid redundancy are omitted from the
first section).

The SCC Scale
General Discussion
One of our aims was to ascertain if clarity can be viewed as a
relatively stable trait that is amenable to measurement by

Examination of the SCC Scale's psychometric properties
yielded strong evidence of its reliability. Evidence of high internal consistency and factorial integrity together suggest that

Table 7
Item Analysisfor Combined Sample: Study 3
M

CORR

Item

Cdn

Jpn

Cdn

Jpn

fj i* r2

1. My beliefs about myself often conflict with one another "
2. On one day I might have one opinion of myself and on another day
I might have a different opinion."
3. I spend a lot of time wondering about what kind of person I really
am.a
4. Sometimes I feel that I am not really the person that I appear to be."
5. When I think about the kind of person I have been in the past, I'm
not sure what I was really like."
6. I seldom experience conflict between the different aspects of my
personality.
7. Sometimes I think I know other people better than I know myself.8
8. My beliefs about myself seem to change very frequently."
9. If I were asked to describe my personality, my description might
end up being different from one day to another day.8
10. Even if 1 wanted to, I don't think I could tell someone what I'm
really like."
11. In general, 1 have a clear sense of who I am and what I am.
12. It is often hard for me to make up my mind about things because I
don't really know what I want."

3.04

2.48**

0.49**

0.07

P<.OOI

2.86

2.16**

0.50**

0.06

3.18
3.11

2.73**
2.48**

0.38**
0.47**

0.03
0.24**

p<.001
p<.0\

3.51

3.61

0.34**

0.13*

P<.O\

3.01
3.37
3.66

2.64*
3.45
3.31**

0.29**
0.35**
0.46**

0.04
0.03
0.15**

p<.O0l
p<.001

3.42

2.98**

0.43**

0.11*

p<.OOl

3.64
3.69

3.01**
2.95**

0.48**
0.54**

0.31**
0.18**

p<.05
p<.O0l

3.24

2.79**

0.44**

0.26**

Total SCC score

39.89

34.70**

0.64

0.28**

Note, CORR = correlation between SE and SCC; Cdn = Canadians; Jpn - Japanese; SCC = Self-Concept Clarity Scale.
" Reverse-keyed item.
* Mean is less than that of the other culture, or correlation is different from 0, p < .05, two-tailed. ** p < .01, two-tailed.

P<.O\

p<.001

This document is copyrighted by the American Psychological Association or one of its allied publishers.
This article is intended solely for the personal use of the individual user and is not to be disseminated broadly.

152

CAMPBELL ET AL.

the scale items tap a single, general factor measuring a unitary
attribute (Briggs & Cheek, 1986). In addition, two tests examining test-retest reliability over 4- and 5-month intervals provided evidence for the scale's temporal stability.
The strong relations between SCC and self-esteem scores, anticipated by prior theory (e.g., Erikson, 1959; Rosenberg, 1965)
and research (e.g., Campbell, 1990), support the SCC Scale's
construct validity. Other lines of evidence, however, also support the theoretical and empirical utility of distinguishing clarity from self-esteem. First, regression analyses (Study 1) demonstrated that the SCC Scale exhibited a consistent pattern of
reliable relations with a number of other traits after controlling
for its overlapping variance with self-esteem. Second, Study 2
showed that the SCC Scale predicted unique variance in external criteria after controlling for self-esteem.6 Finally, Study 3
demonstrated that the substantial correlations with self-esteem
obtained in Western samples were greatly attenuated in Japanese samples, whose cultural mandate does not prescribe that
individuals hold a clearly articulated set of invariant attributes.
Taken together, then, the studies suggest that although clarity
and self-esteem are strongly associated in Western samples, they
are distinct constructs. Future research, however, should examine the extent to which clarity overlaps with characteristics of
self-esteem other than its level (high vs. low). Because people
with low clarity should be more susceptible to and dependent
on the social environment (Campbell, 1990), clarity should
overlap substantially with the lability (stability, certainty) of
global self-esteem (e.g., Kernis & Waschull, 1995; Roberts &
Monroe, 1992).
Study 2 provided evidence for the scale's criterion validity.
SCC scores, recorded 4 months prior to the study, reliably predicted the internal consistency and temporal stability of participants' self-descriptions. The study additionally tested the predictive utility of a number of other measures, including selfesteem, Neuroticism, Extraversion, and self-consciousness. The
correlations between the validity criteria and these other traits
roughly paralleled the magnitude of the associations between
these traits and the SCC Scale. Finally, regression analyses
showed that the SCC Scale predicted unique variance in the
criteria after controlling for these other measures.

Relations With the Big Five Dimensions
SCC exhibited strong correlations with Neuroticism, moderate correlations with Extraversion, Agreeableness, and Conscientiousness, and was uncorrelated with Openness to Experience. Regression analyses, controlling for self-esteem, the other
Big Five dimensions, and the self-focus variables, consistently
revealed that SCC was independently related to Neuroticism
and Conscientiousness and, to a lesser extent, to Agreeableness.
This pattern is consistent with the theoretical definition of clarity and dovetails with prior researchfindingsfor trait adjectives
and questionnaires conceptually related to clarity. For example,
trait adjectives such as unsure, uncertain, and indecisive exhibit
a pattern of Big Five associations similar to those obtained with
the SCC Scale (e.g., Goldberg, 1990). A similar pattern of Big
Five associations was reported for internal locus of control
(Costa, McCrae, & Dye, 1991), an outcome consonant with the
notion that high-clarity people are less susceptible to the social
environment (Campbell, 1990).

Neuroticism
The Neuroticism association was expected given prior demonstrations of strong relations between self-esteem and variables related to the Neuroticism dimension (e.g., Watson et al.,
1988). However, the fact that Neuroticism emerged as an independent concomitant of clarity suggests that facets of Neuroticism other than depression (low self-esteem) may be implicated
in self-uncertainty. Indeed, there is evidence that clarity may be
related to most facets of Neuroticism. For example, Costa and
McCrae (1995) correlated self-ratings on the California Q-set
(CQS; Block, 1961b) with facet scales of Neuroticism and
found that the item "has a clearcut, consistent personality" was
among the highest correlates of the anxiety, angry hostility, and
impulsiveness facets of Neuroticism (see also McCrae & Costa,
1992).

Conscientiousness
The relation with Conscientiousness was anticipated by theoretical writingson the self(e.g.,James, 1890; Murray, 1938, p.
138) and by a broad range of empiricalfindingsfor clarity-related traits. In Goldberg's (1990) comprehensive factor analyses of trait adjectives, several clarity-related adjective clusters
(e.g., inconsistency, indecisiveness) loaded most highly on a
Conscientiousness factor. Similarly, Costa and McCrae (1995)
found the CQS item "has a clearcut, consistent personality" to
be among the strongest correlates of three facets of Conscientiousness: dutifulness, self-discipline, and deliberation. This
same CQS item was also among the best predictors of a behavioral measure of delay of gratification (Funder & Block, 1989).
Together, these findings suggest that both proactive (goaldirectedness) and inhibitive (impulse restraint) aspects of Conscientiousness may be implicated in developing and maintaining a stable, consistent, and clear self-image (or alternatively,
that clarity may be important in the development of
Conscientiousness).

Extraversion
Assertiveness is commonly considered a central facet of Extraversion (McCrae & Costa, 1983). One would expect that assertive individuals would report greater clarity in their self-beliefs than timid individuals, and the SCC Scale consistently exhibited moderate zero-order associations with measures of
Extraversion. Extraversion, however, did not emerge as an independent concomitant of clarity in the regression analyses. This
suggests that the component of Extraversion that overlaps with
clarity also overlaps with some of the other predictors. Because
the assertiveness facet is strongly related to Neuroticism and
Conscientiousness (Goldberg, 1990; Trapnell & Wiggins,
1990), it seems likely that this component accounts for the
zero-order relation between clarity and Extraversion.

6
The regression analyses in Studies 1 and 2 also indicate that clarity
is distinguishable from Neuroticism or NA, another trait that is strongly
associated with clarity.

153

SELF-CONCEPT CLARITY

Agreeableness
Agreeableness was moderately correlated with clarity, an association that retained its significance in the regression analyses. These results corroborate some recent work by Donahue et
al. (1993), who reported that an indirect measure of self-concept fragmentation was associated with low Agreeableness, in
addition to poor adjustment and tow Conscientiousness. They
further demonstrated that low socialization (a blend of low
Conscientiousness and low Agreeableness) at age 21 predicted
self-concept fragmentation more than 30 years later.

This document is copyrighted by the American Psychological Association or one of its allied publishers.
This article is intended solely for the personal use of the individual user and is not to be disseminated broadly.

Openness to Experience
The SCC Scale was uncorrelated with the FFI Openness
Scale, but it was moderately associated (r = .20) with the
NCOG Scale. A nearly identical correlation between the SCC
and NCOG Scales was recently reported by Sadowski, Moore,
and Sellers (1994),7 who argued that the association supports
cognitive-experiential self-theory (Epstein, 1990). Our data
suggest, however, that the correlation between the SCC and
NCOG Scales may simply reflect shared variance with self-esteem or Neuroticism; the correlation between SCC and NCOG
approached 0 after controlling for either self-esteem (r - .02)
or Neuroticism (r = -.02).

Relations With Self-Focused Attention
The SCC Scale's associations with the various measures of
private self-consciousness provide some clues relevant to the
self-absorption paradox. Although the SCC Scale was moderately correlated with the Private Self-Consciousness Scale, its
correlations with the two private subscales revealed a striking
divergence. The PRIV-SR subscale, which taps the tendency to
engage in chronic self-analysis, was substantially associated
with low clarity, but the Internal State Awareness subscale was
slightly associated with high clarity. The regression analyses further revealed that both of these subscales predicted unique variance in SCC scores. These results support Piliavin and Charng's
(1988) claim that the two subscales may be associated in opposite directions with measures of identity seeking and represent
a challenge to those who have based their argument for maintaining the unitary structure of the private scale on the fact that
"there is no evidence for any criterion that is differentially predicted by the two subscales" (Bernstein et al., 1986, p. 473).
Correlations with the RRQ, which assesses two postulated
motives underlying private self-consciousness (curiosity and
anxiety), revealed yet another divergence. SCC was strongly associated with the Rumination Scale but not with the Reflection
Scale. People low in clarity seem to have no more desire to introspect (i.e., reflection) than high-clarity individuals, but they
nonetheless report experiencing more (intrusive) self-relevant
thoughts. Because the Rumination scale is substantially correlated with Neuroticism and the Reflection scale with Openness,
one could argue that this pattern simply replicates the SCC correlations with these Big Five dimensions. However, the Rumination scale consistently emerged as an independent concomitant of (low) clarity, indicating that the self-attentional process
assessed by the Rumination scale contributes unique variance
to self-concept articulation.

With respect to the self-absorption paradox, these results suggest that the relation between perceived self-knowledge and selffocused attention may depend critically on distinguishing between different forms of self-focused attention and different
motives for attending to the self. It has been generally assumed
that the frequency of self-focused attention is related to selfknowledge, but it is possible that the relation depends more on
the motive for attending to the self than on the frequency of
doing so.

Cultural Boundaries ofthe SCC Construct
Consistent with the recent cross-cultural literature (e.g.,
Markus & Kitayama, 1991), Study 3 revealed differences in
SCC scores between Canadians and Japanese. Canadians had
higher SCC scores than Japanese, and Canadians' SCC scores
were more closely associated with their reported self-esteem
than they were for Japanese. The clarity construct was developed within the context of Western culture, in which the habitual point of focus is on the individual, and items were selected
to reflect the clarity of individuals' self-beliefs. However, in Japanese culture, individuals look to the social environment to define the self (Cousins, 1989), suggesting that the apparent inconsistency and instability in Japanese self-concepts probably
appear as a consequence of their interdependent and contextual
nature. Indeed, asking questions about the clarity of the selfconcept in the abstract, without providing any contextual information, might appear odd to Japanese. Although it makes sense
in Western cultures to label a self-concept that is inconsistent
and unstable as low in clarity or confused, these labels are not
appropriate within more contextual cultures such as Japan's.
Here, elevated SCC scores most likely reflect self-concepts that
are normatively prescribed to be contextually flexible or responsive. In support of this reasoning, the Japanese exhibited
significantly lower relations between SCC and SE. We urge caution, then, in interpreting SCC scores in non-Western samples.
Future efforts toward the development of a parallel scale that
measures self-beliefs in cultures in which a contextual and dynamic sense of self is valued would likely prove fruitful.

Summary and Conclusions
We have presented evidence that SCC is a relatively stable trait
that is reliably and validly measured with the SCC Scale. We also
demonstrated the theoretical utility of the construct by showing
that the structural integrity of self-beliefs is an important independent concomitant of self-esteem, Neuroticism, Conscientiousness,
Agreeableness, chronic self-analysis, rumination, and internal
state awareness. The theoretical benefits of the construct have also
been demonstrated by investigators who have focused on other
criteria. For example, Smith, Wethington, and Zhan (1994) recently showed that low clarity (see footnote 7) is uniquely related
(controlling for self-esteem, depression, anxiety, and perceived social support) to a preference for passive coping styles. Similarly,
Setterlund and Neidenthal (1993) reported that a manipulation
of low clarity uniquely predicted (controlling for self-esteem) the
7
This study used the 20-item version of the SCC Scale (Campbell,
Katz, Lavailee, & Trapnell, 1991).

This document is copyrighted by the American Psychological Association or one of its allied publishers.
This article is intended solely for the personal use of the individual user and is not to be disseminated broadly.

154

CAMPBELL ET AL.

Briggs, S. R., & Cheek, J. M. (1986). The role of factor analysis in the
development and evaluation of personality scales. Journal of Personality, 60, 253-293.
Brislin, R. W. (1970). Back-translation for cross-cultural research.
Journal of Cross-Cultural Psychology; 1, 185-216.
Britt, T. W. (1992). The Self-Consciousness Scale: On the stability of
the three-factor structure. Personality and Social Psychology Bulletin. 18, 748-755Brockner, J. (1984). Low self-esteem and behavioral plasticity: Some
implications for personality and social psychology. In L. Wheeler
(Ed.), Review ofpersonality and social psychology (Vol. 4, pp. 237271). Beverly Hills, CA: Sage.
Burnkrant, R-, & Page, T. (1984). A modification of the Fenigstein,
Scheier, and Buss Self-Consciousness Scale. Journal of Personality
Assessment, 48, 629-637.
Buss, A. (1980). Self-consciousness and social anxiety. San Francisco:
W. H. Freeman.
Byrne, D. (1961). The Repression-Sensitization Scale: Rationale, reliability, and validity. Journal ofPersonality, 29, 334-349.
Cacioppo, J. T, & Petty, R. E. (1982). The need for cognition. Journal
ofPersonality and Social Psychology, 42, 116-131.
Cacioppo, J. T, Petty, R. E., & FCao, C. F. (1984). The efficient assessment of need for cognition. Journal of Personality Assessment, 48,
306-307.
References
Campbell, J. D. (1990). Self-esteem and clarity of the self-concept.
Journal ofPersonality and Social Psychology, 59, 538-549.
Adler, A. (1959), The practice and theory of individual psychology. ToCampbell, J. D. (1995). [Mood and self-concept clarity ]. Unpublished
towa, NJ: Littlefield, Adams.
raw data.
Alloy, L. B., & Abramson, L. Y. (1982). Learned helplessness, desperation, and the illusion of control. Journal of Personality and Social Campbell, J. D., Chew, B., & Scratchley, L. S. (1991). Cognitive and
Psychology, 36, 1114-1126.
emotional reactions to daily events: The effects of self-esteem and
Alloy, L. B., & Abramson, L. Y. (1988). Depressive realism: Four theoself-complexity. Journal ofPersonality, 59, 473-505.
retical perspectives. In L. Alloy (Ed.), Cognitive processes in depres- Campbell, J. D., & Fehr, B. (1990). Self-esteem and perceptions of consion (pp. 223-265). New York: Guilford Press.
veyed impressions: Is negative affectivity associated with greater realAllport, G. (1961). Patterns and growth in personality. New York: Holt,
ism? Journal ofPersonality and Social Psychology, 58, 122-133.
Rinehart & Winston.
Campbell, J. D., Katz, I. M., Lavallee, L. E, & Trapnell, P. D. (1991,
Baumeister, R. E (1986). Identity. New "Vbrk: Oxford University Press.
August). Development and validation of a self-report scale ofself conBaumeister, R. F. (1993). Understanding the inner nature of low selfcept clarity. Paper presented at the annual conference of the Ameriesteem: Uncertain, fragile, protective, and conflicted. In Self-esteem:
can Psychological Society, Washington, DC.
The puzzle oflow self-regard (pp. 201 -218). New York: Plenum.
Campbell, J. D., & Lavallee, L. F. (1993). Who am 1?: The role of selfBaumgardner, A. H. (1990). To know oneself is to like oneself: Selfconcept confusion in understanding the behavior of people with low
certainty and self-affect. Journal of Personality and Social Psycholself-esteem. In R. F. Baumeister(Ed.), Self-esteem: The puzzle of low
ogy, 58, 1062-1072.
self-regard (pp. 3-20). New "York: Plenum.
Beck, A. T. (1967). Depression: Clinical, experimental, and theoreticalConley, J. J. (1984). The hierarchy of consistency: A review and model
aspects. New \fork: Harper & Row.
of longitudinalfindingson adult individual differences in intelligence,
Bell, P. A., & Byrne, D. (1978). Repression-sensitization. In H. London
personality and self-opinion. Personality and Individual Differences,
& J. E. Exner(EAs.), Dimensions of personality (pp. 449-485). New
5,11-25.
York: Wiley.
Costa, P. T, Jr., & McCrae, R. R. (1985). The NEO Personality InvenBendig, A. W. (1956). The development of a short form of the Manifest
tory manual. Odessa, FL: Psychological Assessment Resources.
Anxiety Scale. Journal of Consulting Psychology, 20, 384.
Costa, P. T, Jr., & McCrae, R. R. (1989). TheNEOPI/FFImanual
Bernstein, I. H., Teng, G., & Garbin, C. P. (1986). A confirmatory facsupplement. Odessa, FL: Psychological Assessment Resources.
toring of the Self-Consciousness Scale. Multivariate Behavioral ReCosta, P. T, Jr., & McCrae, R. R. (1995). Domains and facets: Hierarsearch, 21, 459-475.
chical personality assessment using the Revised NEO Personality InBlaine, B., & Crocker, J. (1993). Self-esteem and self-serving biases in
ventory. Journal ofPersonality Assessment, 64, 21-50.
reactions to positive and negative events: An integrative review. In
R. F. Baumeister (Ed.), Self-esteem: The puzzle of low self-regard Costa, P. T., Jr., McCrae, R. R., & Dye, D. A. (1991). Facet scales for
Agreeableness and Conscientiousness: A revision of the NEO Person(pp. 55-86). New York: Plenum.
ality Inventory. Personality and Individual Differences, 12, 887-898.
Block, J. (1961a). Ego identity, role variability, and adjustment.
Cousins, S. (1989). Culture and selfhood in Japan and the United
Journal of Consulting Psychology, 25, 392-397.
States. Journal ofPersonality and Social Psychology, 56, 124-131.
Block, J. (1961b). The Q-sort method in personality assessment and
Crowne, D. P.,&Marlowe, D. (1960). A new scale of social desirability
psychiatric research. Springfield, IL: Charles C Thomas.
independent of psychopathology. Journal of Consulting Psychology,
Bond, M. H., & Cheung, T. (1983). College students' spontaneous selfconcept. Journal of Cross-Cultural Psychology, 14, 153-171.
24, 349-354,
Briggs, S. R. (1992). Assessing thefive-factormodel of personality deDonahue, E. M., Robins, R. W, Roberts, B. W., & John, O. P. (1993).
scription. Journal ofPersonality, 60, 253-293.
The divided self: Concurrent and longitudinal effects of psychological

failure to use a decision-making strategy that involves the self to
guide choice behavior (i.e., prototype matching). Also, although
the present article focuses on dispositional clarity, Lavallee and
Campbell (1995) recently documented the importance of state
changes in self-concept clarity in understanding people's responses
to daily negative events that are related and unrelated to their personal goals.
All of these data, however, are mute with respect to the causal
relations between clarity and its correlates. In discussing the clarity-self-esteem relation, Campbell and Lavallee (1993) provided
plausible theoretical mechanisms and cited experimental data that
supported both possibilities—that clarity causes self-esteem and
vice versa. Because similar arguments (and some data) could be
cited with respect to many of the other relations reported here, it
seems probable that, at least among adults, the causal connections
are reciprocal. Nonetheless, we are hopeful that ongoing research
will eventually elucidate clarity's etiology. For example, the consistent evidence of moderate heritability for Neuroticism and Conscientiousness (see Loehlin, 1992) implies that these traits likely
play a causal role in the development and maintenance of a stable
self-concept.

This document is copyrighted by the American Psychological Association or one of its allied publishers.
This article is intended solely for the personal use of the individual user and is not to be disseminated broadly.

SELF-CONCEPT CLARITY

155

adjustment and social roles on self-concept differentiation. Journal
(Ed.), Advances in experimental social psychology (Vol. 27, pp. 93ofPersonality and Social Psychology, 64,834-846.
141). New York: Academic Press.
Epstein, S. (1990). Cognitive-experiential self-theory: An integrative
Kihlstrom, J. E, & Cantor, N. (1984). Mental representations of the
theory of personality. In R. Curtis (Ed.), The self with others: Conself. In L. Berkowitz (Ed.), Advances in experimental social psycholvergences in psychoanalytic, social, and personality psychology (pp. ogyCVol. 17, pp. 1-47). San Diego, CA: Academic Press.
111-137). New York: Guilford Press.
Kihlstrom, J. F., Cantor, N., Albright, J. S., Chew, B. R., Klein, S. B., &
Neidenthal, P. M. (1988). Information processing and the study of
Erikson, E. (1959). Identity and the life cycle. In G. S. Klein (Ed.),
the self. In L. Berkowitz (Ed.), Advances in experimental social psyPsychological issues {pp. 1-171). New York: International Universichology (Vol. 21, pp. 159-187). San Diego, CA: Academic Press.
ties Press.
Fenigstein, A., Scheier, M. E, &. Buss, A. (1975). Public and private
Lavallee, L. F., & Campbell, J. D. (1995). Impact of personal goals on
self-consciousness. Journal of Consulting and Clinical Psychology,
self-regulation processes elicited by daily negative events. Journal of
43, 522-527.
Personality and Social Psychology, 69, 341-352.
Frone, M. R-, & McFarlin D. B. (1989). Chronic occupational stresLennox, R., & Welch, L. (1987). Assessment of self-consciousness.
Representative Research in Social Psychology, 17, 53-74.
sors, self-focused attention, and well-being: Testing a cybernetic
model of stress. Journal of Applied Psychology, 74, 876-883.
Linville, P. W. (1985). Self-complexity and affective extremity: Don't
put all of your eggs in one cognitive basket. Social Cognition, 3, 94Funder, D. C, & Block, J. (1989). The role of ego-control, ego-resil120.
iency, and IQ in delay of gratification in adolescence. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 57, 1041-1050.
Linville, P. W. (1987). Self-complexity as a cognitive buffer against
stress-related illness and depression. Journal of Personality and SoGergen, K. J., & Morse, S. (1967). Self-consistency: Measurement and
cial Psychology, 52,663-676.
validation. Proceedings of the American Psychological Association,
75, 207-208.
Loehlin, J. C. (1992). Genes and environment in personality development. London: Sage.
Goldberg, L. R. (1990). An alternative "description of personality":
The Big-Five factor structure. Journal of Personality and Social Psy- Mahler, I. (1976). What is the self-concept in Japan? Psychologia, 19,
127-132.
chology, 59, 1216-1229.
Goldberg, L. R. (1993). The structure of phenotypic personality traits.
Marcia, J. E. (1980). Identity in adolescence. In J. Adelson (Ed.),
American Psychologist, 48,26-34.
Handbook ofadolescent psychology {pp. 159-187). New York: Wiley.
Gordon, J. E. (1957). Interpersonal prediction of repressors and sensiMarkus, H. (1977). Self-schemata and processing information about
tizers. Journal ofPersonality, 25.686-698.
the self. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 35,63-78.
Gould, S. J. (1986). The Self-Consciousness Scale: A confirmatory
Markus, H. R., & Kitayama, S. (1991). Culture and the self: Implicaanalysis. Psychological Reports, 59, 809-810.
tions for cognition, emotion, and motivation. Psychological Review,
98, 224-253.
Greenwald, A. G., & Pratkanis, A. R. (1984). The self. In R. S. Wyer &
T. K. Srull (Eds.), Handbook of social cognition (Vol. 3, pp. 129- Markus, H. R., & Wurf, E. (1987). The dynamic self-concept: A social
178). Hillsdale, NJ: Erlbaum.
psychological perspective. Annual Review ofPsychology, 38, 299-337.
Hathaway, S. R., & McKinley, J. C (1951). MMPI manual. New York: McCrae, R. R., & Costa, P. T, Jr. (1983). Joint factors in self-reports
Psychological Corporation.
and ratings: Neuroticism, Extraversion, and Openness to Experience.
Personality and Individual Differences, 4, 245-255.
Heine, S. J., & Lehman, D. R. (1995). When the twain meet: Self-assessments and exposure to Western culture. Manuscript in
McCrae, R. R., & Costa, P. T., Jr. (1987). Validation of the five-factor
preparation.
model of personality across instruments and observers. Journal of
Personality and Social Psychology, 52, 81-90.
Heine, "S. J., Lehman, D. R.( Okugawa, O., & Campbell, J. D. (1992).
The effects of culture on self-implicated processes: A comparison of
McCrae, R. R., & Costa, P. T, Jr. (1992). Discriminant validity of
Canadians and Japanese. Ritsumeikan Review ofSocial Sciences, 74,
NEO-PI-R facet scales. Educational and Psychological Measurement,
52,229-237.
29-38.
Helmreich, R., Stapp, J., & Ervin, C. (1974). The Texas Social BehavMeyer, G. J., & Shack, J. R. (1989). The structural convergence of
mood and personality: Evidence for old and new directions. Journal
ior Inventory (TSBI): An objective measure of self-esteem or social
ofPersonality and Social Psychology, 57, 81-90.
competence. JSAS Catalog ofSelected Documents in Social PsycholMittal, B., & Balsubramanian, S. K. (1987). Testing the dimensionality
ogy, 4.79(Ms. No. 681).
of the self-consciousness scales. Journal of Personality Assessment,
Hogan, R. (1986). Hogan Personality Inventory manual. Minneapolis,
51, 53-68.
MN: National Computer Systems.
Mullen, B., & Suls, J. (1982). "Know Thyself": Stressful life changes
Hull, J. G., Van Treuren, R. R., Ashford, S. J., Propsom, P., & Andrus,
and the ameliorative effect of private self-consciousness. Journal of
B. S. (1988). Self-consciousness and the processing of self-relevant
information. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 54, 452- Experimental Social Psychology, 18, 43-55.
Murray, H. A. (1938). Explorations in personality. New York: Oxford
465.
Ingram, R. (1990). Self-focused attention in clinical disorders: Review
University Press.
and a conceptual model. Psychological Bulletin, 107, 156-176.
Nasby, W. (1985). Private self-consciousness, articulation of the selfschema, and recognition memory of trait adjectives. Journal of PerJackson, D. N. (1976). Jackson Personality Inventory manual. Goshen,
sonality and Social Psychology, 49, 704-709.
NY: Research Psychologists Press.
James, W. (1890). The principles of psychology (Vol. 1). New York: Nasby, W. (1989). Private and public self-consciousness and articulation of the self-schema. Journal ofPersonality and Social Psychology,
Holt.
56, 117-123.
Kernis, M. H., & Grannemann, B. D. (!988). Private self-consciousness and perceptions of self-consistency. Personality and Individual O'Brien, E. J., & Epstein, S. (1988). MSEI: The Multidimensional SelfEsteem Inventory. Odessa, FL: Psychological Assessment Resources.
Differences, 9, 897-902.
Paulhus, D. L. (1991). Measurement and control of response bias. In
Kernis, M. H., & Waschull, S. B. (1995). The interactive roles of stabilJ. P. Robinson, P. R. Shaver, & L. S. Wrightsman (Eds.), Measures of
ity and level of self-esteem: Research and theory. In M. P. Zanna

156

CAMPBELL ET AL.

personality and social attitudes (pp. 17-59). San Diego, CA: Academic Press.
Paulhus, D. L., & Levitt, K. (1983). A short version of the RepressionSensitization Scale: Themini-RS. Unpublished manuscript. University of British Columbia, Vancouver, British Columbia, Canada.
Piliavin, J., & Charng, H. (1988). What is the factorial structure of the
Private and Public Self-Consciousness Scales? Personality and Social
Psychology Bulletin, 14, 587-595.
Roberts, J. E., & Monroe, S. M. {1992). Vulnerable self-esteem and
depressive symptoms: Prospective findings comparing three alternative conceptualizations. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology,

This document is copyrighted by the American Psychological Association or one of its allied publishers.
This article is intended solely for the personal use of the individual user and is not to be disseminated broadly.

62,804-812.
Rosenberg, M. (1965). Society and the adolescent self-image.
Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press.
Sadowski, C. J., Moore, B. J., & Sellers, K. D. (1994, March). Need
for cognition and self-concept clarity Paper presented at the annual
conference of the Southeastern Psychological Association, New Orleans, LA.
Salovey, P. (1992). Mood-induced self-focused attention. Journal of
Personality and Social Psychology, 62, 699-707.
Scheier, M. F., Buss, A. H., & Buss, D. M. {1978). Self-consciousness,
self-report of aggressiveness and aggression. Journal of Research in
Personality 12, 133-140.
Schlenker, B. R. (1985). Identity and self-identification. In The self and
social life (pp. 65-100). New York: McGraw-Hill.
Setterlund, M. B., & Neidenthal, P. M. (1993). "Who am I? Why am I
here?": Self-esteem, self-clarity, and prototype matching. Journal of
Personality and Social Psychology, 65, 769-780.
Showers, C. (1992). Compartmentalization of positive and negative
self-knowledge: Keeping bad apples out of the bunch. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 62, 1036-1049.
Smith, M., Wethington, E., & Zhan, G. (1994). Self-concept clarity and
preferred coping styles. Unpublished manuscript, Cornell University.
Suls, J., & Fletcher, B. (1985). Self-attention, life stress, and illness: A
prospective study. Psychosomatic Medicine, 47, 469-481.
Taylor, J. A. (1953). A personality scale of manifest anxiety. Journal of
Abnormal and Social Psychology 48, 285-290.
Tellegen, A. (1985). Structures of mood and personality and their relevance to assessing anxiety, with an emphasis on self-report. In
A. H. Tuma& J. D. Masur(Eds.), Anxiety and the anxiety disorders
(pp. 681-706). Hillsdale, NJ: Erlbaum.
Tellegen, A., &. Waller, N. G. (in press). Exploring personality through

test construction: Development of the Multidimensional Personality
Questionnaire. In S. R. Briggs, J. M. Cheek, & E. Donahue (Eds.),
Handbook of personality inventories. New York: Plenum.
Tice, D. M. (1993). The social motivations of people with low selfesteem. In R. F. Baumeister(Ed.), Self-esteem: The puzzle of low selfregard(pp. 37-54). New York: Plenum.
Trapnell, P. D., & Campbell, J. D. (1995). Self-consciousness and the
five-factor model of personality: Distinguishing reflection from rumination. Manuscript submitted for publication.
Trapnell, P. D., & Wiggins, J. S. (1990). Extension of the interpersonal
adjective scales to include the Big Five dimensions of personality.
Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 59, 781 -790.
Watson, D., & Clark, L. A. (1984). Negative affectivity: The disposition
to experience aversive emotional states. Psychological Bulletin, 96,
465-490.
Watson, J. D., & Clark, L. A. (1992). On traits and temperament: General and specific factors of emotional experience and their relation to
the Five-Factor model. Journal of Personality, 60, 441 -499.
Watson, D., Clark, L. A., & Tellegen, A. (1988). Development and validation of brief measures of positive and negative affect: The PANAS
scales. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 54, 1063-1070.
Watson, D., & Tellegen, A. (1985). Toward a consensual structure of
mood. Psychological Bulletin, 98,219-235.
Wicklund, R. A., & Eckert, M. (1992). The self-knower: A hero under
control. New York: Plenum.
Wiggins, J. S. (1973). Personality and prediction: Principles of personality assessment. Reading, MA: Addison-Wesley.
Wiggins, J. S. (1979). A psychological taxonomy of trait descriptive
words: The interpersonal domain. Journal of Personality and Social
Psychology, 37, 395-412.
Wiggins, J. S., & Trapnell, P. D. (in press). Personality structure: The
return of the Big Five. In R. Hogan, J. Johnson, & S. R. Briggs (Eds.),
Handbook of personality psychology. New York: Academic Press.
Wood, J. V., Saltzberg, J. A., & Goldsamt, L. A. (1990). Does affect
induce self-focused attention? Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 58, 899-908.
Woods, W, Rhodes, M., & Whelan, N. (1989). Sex differences in positive well-being: A consideration of emotional style and marital status.
Psychological Bulletin, 106, 249-264.

Received August 22, 1994
Revision received May 2, 1995
Accepted May 3, 1995 •

