Journal of Personality and Social Psychology
1979, Vol. 37, No. 3, 395-412

A Psychological Taxonomy of Trait-Descriptive Terms:
The Interpersonal Domain
Jerry S. Wiggins
University of British Columbia, Vancouver, Canada
The eventual aim of the research reported is the development of a comprehensive taxonomy of trait-descriptive terms in the English language. Building on
earlier work of Allport, Norman, and Goldberg, preliminary a priori distinctions
were made among different domains of trait categories. General procedures for
developing structured taxonomies within domains were illustrated with reference
to the interpersonal domain. Theoretical considerations dictated the definition
of the universe of content, the choice of measurement model, and the procedures for classifying terms within the domain. Eight adjectival scales were developed as markers of the principal vectors of the interpersonal domain. The
substantive, structural, and psychometric characteristics of these scales were
found to be highly satisfactory. Hence, they may prove useful both as assessment devices in their own right and as reference points for the classification of
variables in personality and social psychology.

Personality is that branch of psychology
which is concerned with providing a systematic account of the ways in which individuals differ from one another (Wiggins, Renner, Clore, & Rose, 1971). Individuals differ
from one another in a variety of ways: their
anatomical and physiognomic characteristics;
their personal appearance, grooming, and
manner of dress; their social backgrounds,
roles, and other demographic characteristics;
their effect on others or social stimulus value;
and at any given moment in time, their
temporary states, moods, attitudes, and activities. But the principal goal of personality
study is to provide a systematic account of
individual differences in human tendencies
The early stages of this research were supported by
Grant MH 12972 from the National Institute of
Mental Health, U.S. Public Health Service (Lewis
R. Goldberg, principal investigator). More recent
work was supported by Canada Council Research
Grant S75-0109. An earlier version of this article
was presented at the meeting of the Society of
Multivariate Experimental Psychology, Gleneden
Beach, Oregon, November 1975.
Requests for reprints should be sent to Jerry S.
Wiggins, Department of Psychology, University of
British Columbia, Vancouver, British Columbia,
Canada V6T 1WS.

(proclivities, propensities, dispositions, inclinations) to act or not to act in certain ways
on certain occasions.
Although such tendencies are commonly
called "traits," the use of that term in contemporary psychological discourse carries with
it implications of a particular theoretical commitment, a preferred method of scientific investigation, and a philosophical preference for
certain kinds of explanation in theory construction. Hence, it is necessary to make it
clear at the outset that an interest in human
tendencies (traits) does not imply a theoretical precommitment to such issues as
whether traits are manifestations of generative or causal mechanisms (Allport, 1937);
whether trait attributions reflect specific cognitive processes of observers (Heider, 19S8);
whether traits are best construed idiographically or nomothetically (Allport, 1937; Bern
& Allen, 1974; Kelly, 1955); or whether consistencies in human tendencies are largely due
to environmental or situational constancies
(Mischel, 1968).
In my view, consistent patterns of human
conduct constitute the basic data of personality study, which require rather than provide
explanation (Wiggins, Note 1). In approach-

Copyright 1979 by the American Psychological Association, Inc. 0022-3514/79/3703-0395$00.75

395

396

JERRY S. WIGGINS

ing this task of accounting for individual
differences in human tendencies, I share with
others the conviction that the natural language provides a convenient starting place
(Allport, 1937; Cattell, 1957; Goldberg, Note
2; Norman, Note 3). The universe of content
of human tendencies is contained within the
covers of an unabridged dictionary of the
English language. I also share with these
writers the conviction that an adequate taxonomy of trait-descriptive terms must precede meaningful empirical studies of human
tendencies. There have been a number of
systematic efforts to develop a personality
taxonomy over the past 40 years, and my own
work has attempted to capitalize on these
earlier efforts.
Allport and Odbert (1936) examined the
approximately half million separate entries or
derivatives included in Webster's New International Dictionary (1924) for terms that
appeared "to distinguish the behavior of one
human being from that of another" (p. 24)
and identified a pool of 17,953 terms having
this characteristic. Norman (Note 3) scanned
the entire contents of Webster's Third New
International Dictionary Unabridged (1961)
for additional terms that had not been included in the Allport-Odbert list. The universe
of content thus denned was approximately
27,000 terms. Subsequently, Norman and
Goldberg were able to reduce this list by
eliminating obscure, inappropriate, and archaic terms. The focus of all of these investigations has been on a subset of approximately
3,600 terms that Allport initially called "stable biophysical traits." Allport considered
these to be "real" traits as opposed to temporary states, moods, social roles, physical
characteristics, and so forth.
However one conceives of stable biophysical
traits, I see them as no more nor less real
than any other kinds of human characteristics. I agree with Guilford (1959) that "a
trait is any distinguishable, relatively enduring way in which one individual differs
from others" (p. 6). But I see the major
taxonomic task as that of specifying the different kinds of ways in which individuals
differ from each other. One kind of way in
which individuals differ from each other is in
terms of what they do to each other. Thus, I

think that one of the most important categories of traits is that which may be designated "interpersonal." Within the realm of
things that people do to each other, it is
desirable to make a further theoretical distinction between interpersonal exchanges
based on love and status and interpersonal
exchanges based on goods, money, and services (Foa & Foa, 1974). The former are
called interpersonal traits and the latter material traits.
Another equally "real" way in which individuals are distinguishable from one another
is in terms of their styles of emotional reactivity, which we refer to as "temperament."
It is also possible to distinguish individuals
on the basis of the particular roles and status
they hold within the framework of our social
institutions. Additionally, there are "character" terms that represent appraisals of an
individual based on a code of proper behavior. And finally, there are many words that
refer to individual differences in qualities of
mind as manifested in thought, perception,
and speech.
Consider the following trait-descriptive adjectives: aggressive, miserly, lively, ceremonious, dishonest, and analytical. I would classify
these terms as representative of the six trait
categories just mentioned, namely, interpersonal traits, material traits, temperamental
traits, social roles, character, and mental
predicates. Here I differ from Allport, Norman, and Goldberg, who view all of these
terms as "stable biophysical traits," without
attempting to differentiate the different kinds
of descriptive jobs such terms perform for us.
To these earlier authors' important distinction between stable traits and temporary
states, moods, social evaluations, and so forth,
I would add finer distinctions within the category of stable traits.
The present article describes our first efforts to develop a taxonomy of personality
trait-descriptive terms in the English language. The universe of content is taken to be
Norman's (Note 3) total lexicon of 18,125
terms. Within this broader framework, I intend to focus on the "prime" categories of
Norman, which involve 4,063 relatively familiar and nonobscure terms. Even restricting
our attention to prime terms, we are still

TAXONOMY OF INTERPERSONAL TRAITS

397

Facet I
DIRECTION

Facet II
OBJECT

Facet III
RESOURCE

INTERPERSONAL

STATUS[

[ LOVE

|STATUS]

+
+

+
+
+

JSTATUS|

| LOVE

| LOVE [

-

-

-

[STATUS

VARIABLES

NO ( Gregarious-Extroverted )
PA ( Ambitious-Dominant)
BC ( Arrogant-Calculating )

+

DE ( Cold-Quarrelsome )
FG ( Aloof-Introverted )
HI (Lazy-Submissive )
JK (Unassuming-Ingenuous )
LM ( Warm - Agreeable)

+

-t-

+

Figure 1. Facet composition of interpersonal variables (after Foa & Foa, 1974). ( + = acceptance;
— = rejection.)

confronted with a list of staggering size. Our
enterprise required a clear-cut game plan or
research strategy to guide us through this sea
of words.
We began by defining a limited taxonomy
on an a priori basis. We attempted to specify
different domains of human characteristics
based on the different descriptive jobs performed by the words within the domains.
Next, we attempted preliminary a priori classifications within domains, mainly as a means
of keeping track of terms and lightening our
clerical burdens. The overall strategy for
developing a taxonomy within a single domain
may be honorifically described as "iterative,"
although "trial and error" may be a more apt
descriptor. Our main concern was the avoidance of premature "fixing" of a taxonomy.
Hence, all preliminary classifications were
tentative in nature and subject to continual
revision in the light of other developing categories. This rather complex interactive strategy will be illustrated with reference to the
development of a taxonomy within the domain of interpersonal traits.

The Domain of Interpersonal Traits
The line of reasoning to be presented originated in the interpersonal theory of Sullivan
(1953) and was later operationalized in a set
of personality measurement procedures by
Leary (1957) and his colleagues. Foa (1961,
1965) integrated this theory with Guttman's
(1954) order analysis, and the general orientation was extended to domains other than
the interpersonal by Rinn (1965). Notable
interpersonal systems based on a circumplex
model have also been described by Becker and
Krug (1964), Benjamin (1974), Lorr and
McNair (1963), Schaefer (1959), and Stern
(1970). This general framework was integrated with interpersonal exchange theory
(Homans, 1961) by Carson (1969) and by
Foa and Foa (1974).
In their most recent theoretical statement,
Foa and Foa (1974) describe the development
of cognitive categories of social perception as
a progressive differentiation of structure involving facets of directionality, object, and
resource. A somewhat simplified version of
Foa and Foa's representation of this structure
is illustrated at the top of Figure 1. The earli-

398

JERRY S. WIGGINS

est cognitive schemata are based on the discrimination of the directionality of social
events (give vs. take, accept vs. reject). With
the acquisition of the concept of social object
(self vs. other) four categories of social meaning are discriminated (e.g., give to self, take
away from other). Out of an initially undifferentiated matrix of resource classes, services
are differentiated from love, and the latter is
further differentiated into love and status.
With the distinction between love and status,
earlier facets become reorganized, and it is
possible to distinguish eight features of social
meaning (e.g., granting status to oneself,
denying love to another). These eight features
may be thought of as part of a semantic code
strip that provides the basic discriminations
for encoding and decoding interpersonal events
(Osgood, 1970).
Within the above context, interpersonal
events may be denned as dyadic interactions
that have relatively clear-cut social (status)
and emotional (love) consequences for both
participants (self and other). This definition
provides a theoretical basis for distinguishing
interpersonal traits from other categories of
trait descriptors, such as temperament, moods,
cognitive traits, and physical characteristics.
Under the semantic features in Figure 1
are listed eight theoretical interpersonal variables. The organization of these variables is
thought to be determined by an interrelated
set of societal rules that impart meaning to
social events (Wiggins, Note 1). Thus, actions that have the same profile of semantic
features are categorized as belonging to the
same response class. The semantic features of
each of the eight variables appear as rows in
Figure 1. Note that the first variable (NO)
is coded on all the positive (accept) categories
for self and other with respect to both love
and status. The first variable is in marked
contrast to FG for which all values are negative (reject). Variables NO and FG have no
features in common, but since acceptance and
rejection are logically opposed concepts, it
would be expected that the two variables
would be strongly negatively correlated. Similar relationships can be seen to exist between
PA and HI, BC and JK, and DE and LM. Note
also that each variable differs from its ad-

jacent variable by only one element. This is
also true of the first (NO) and last (LM)
variables, and hence the structural relations
among this set of variables can be represented
as a circumplex (Guttman, 1954).
The labels that have been attached to the
interpersonal variables in Figure 1 (gregarious-extraverted, ambitious-dominant, etc.)
are meant to capture the flavor of terms that
share the same profile of semantic features
and may serve more as tags than as definitions.
Thus, for example, the rather inelegant label
of "lazy-submissive" is attached to interpersonal transactions involving incompetence,
passive resistance, submission, or obedience.
These otherwise diverse attributes share in
common the semantic features of denying
status to self, denying love to both self and
other, and granting status to other. A fuller
listing of representative terms in each category may be found in Table 2, later in this
article.
Were we to collect personality measurements on the eight variables listed in Figure
1, their intercorrelations would, in theory,
show the pattern illustrated in Table 1. The
correlation of a variable with itself is assumed to be unity, so that the principal diagonal of this matrix contains ones. The correlations along this main diagonal are large
and positive, and they decrease across successive minor diagonals to the w/2nd variable,
where they are a minimum. The correlations
then increase up to a large positive value in
the off-diagonal matrix. The circumplexity of
this or any other set of variables can be
evaluated directly from the intercorrelation
matrix. A rigorous procedure for assessing the
circumplexity of a set of variables involves
plotting the correlations of each variable
(ordinate) with the other variables in sequence (abscissa). This procedure should generate a series of overlapping sine curves that
can be evaluated for goodness of fit (Stern,
1970).
An alternative procedure for evaluating circumplexity is to extract the first two principal
components from the matrix of intercorrelations and to examine the plot of the variables
on the two components. Figure 2 presents the
plot of the eight variables on two principal

TAXONOMY OF INTERPERSONAL TRAITS
Table 1
Hypothetical Correlations Among Eight Interpersonal

399

Variables

Variable

PA

BC

DE

FG

HI

JK

LM

NO

PA
BC
DE
FG
HI
JK
LM
NO

1.00
.50
.00
-.50
-1.00
-.50
.00
.50

1.00
.50
.00
-.50
-1.00
-.50
.00

1.00
.50
.00
-.50
-1.00
-.50

1.00
.50
.00
-.50
-1.00

1.00
.50
.00
-.50

1.00
.50
.00

1.00
.50

1.00

Note. PA = ambitious-dominant; BC = arrogant-calculating; DE = cold-quarrelsome; FG = aloofintroverted; HI = lazy-submissive; JK = unassuming-ingenuous; LM = warm-agreeable; NO = gregarious-extraverted.

components extracted from the intercorrelations in Table 1. As can be seen from this
figure, the intercorrelations among variables
in Table 1 form a perfect, equally spaced circumplex. This pattern follows, both theoretically and empirically, from the pattern of
shared semantic features among the variables
illustrated at the bottom of Figure 1. Variables
that share three features in common are adjacent to each other on the circle; variables
that have no features in common are opposite
each other.

There are two distinct advantages to the
representation of interpersonal variables by a
two-dimensional circumplex. The first is that
it provides an explicit conceptual definition
of the universe of content of interpersonal behavior. Any behavior that meets the definition of a meaningful interpersonal event given
above must be capable of being represented as
a vector originating from the center of the
circle. Thus, the specific system proposed
here is potentially falsifiable. The second advantage of the circumplex model is that it

AMBITIOUS
DOMINANT

(PA)
o

GREGARIOUS o EXTRAVERTED

ARROGANT CALCULATING 0

(NO)

(BC)

WARM o AGREEABLE

COLD QUARRELSOME o

(LM)

(DE)

UNASSUMING
o INGENUOUS

ALOOF INTROVERTED o
(FG)

(JK)

o

LAZYSUBMISSIVE
(HI)

Figure 2. Perfect circumplex of interpersonal variables.

400

JERRY S. WIGGINS

alerts the investigator to noticeable "gaps" in
the interpersonal space of a given set of variables. Strictly empirical procedures of variable selection are likely to deemphasize the
importance of certain variables that are implied by the logic of the circumplex system
but that are underrepresented in the English
language. Although the system of interpersonal variables under discussion is limited to
eight variables, it could in principle be equally
well represented by 16, 32, or 64 variables.
The thinness with which we slice the circumplex pie is limited by the reliability with
which respondents can distinguish between
closely synonymous words or phrases.
It should be evident that the preceding
theoretical considerations substantially constrain the final form that a taxonomy of interpersonal traits may assume. The definition
of interpersonal events, the specification of
their underlying facet structure, and the selection of a measurement model to represent relationships among variables all express a
commitment to a particular, albeit widely
shared, conceptualization of the domain under
investigation. In this sense, the eventual taxonomy of trait-descriptive terms will be a
"psychological" taxonomy rather than a
strictly "semantic" taxonomy based on dictionary definitions. It is assumed that the
semantic structures underlying social perception in this culture cannot be inferred in any
obvious way from dictionary definitions. Investigators who start with different assumptions and who utilize different measurement
models would undoubtedly devise somewhat
different taxonomies. Structural relationships
of the kind at issue here are not "discovered"
(Loevinger, 1957). They are postulated and
then evaluated for goodness of fit.
Development of Interpersonal Clusters
Rational Categorization
In a preliminary attempt to make the distinction among kinds of trait terms discussed
above, I classified all of the trait descriptors
in Goldberg's (Note 2) pool of 1,710 adjectives into one or another of seven a priori
categories. At that stage in the development

of the taxonomy, the principal distinctions
were between interpersonal trait terms, temperamental trait terms, and mental predicate
terms. Tentative categories of "attitudinal
terms" and "constancy" were employed at this
point, as well as a "miscellaneous" category
that involved various dimensions that could
not be clearly classified into other categories.
In the initial sorting of the 1,710 adjectives,
approximately 800 terms were identified as
"interpersonal" under our working definition
of interpersonal traits.
For purposes of preliminary categorization,
we selected Leary's (1957) system of interpersonal traits, because it appeared to be the
most explicit system described in the literature, an entire book being devoted to the topic.
Two colleagues 1 and I thoroughly familiarized
ourselves with the system and its theoretical
framework. Working as a team, we considered each of the approximately 800 terms
previously classified as interpersonal and attempted to classify each within one of the 16
interpersonal vectors. Adjectives that could
not be classified within the 16 dimensions and
that did not appear to belong in one of the
other five a priori categories were temporarily
set aside for further analysis. There were remarkably few such adjectives. With considerable effort we were able to distribute 567
adjectives across the 16 categories with unanimous agreement among three raters.
Selection oj Preliminary Markers
Social desirability scale values for all adjectives were available from a previous study
by Norman (Note 2), and mean self-endorsement frequencies were available from a more
recent study by Goldberg (Note 2 ) . On the
basis of these itemmetric data, items were
selected to serve as preliminary nuclear
clusters within each of the 16 interpersonal
categories. These items were selected in such
a way as to represent the category unambiguously across the range of endorsement frequencies and desirability values. Approxi1
1 am grateful to James M. Kilkowski and Alexander Galvin for their help and support in this
enterprise.

TAXONOMY OF INTERPERSONAL TRAITS

mately 12 items were selected for each category.
In Goldberg's sample of 70 male and 117
female University of Oregon undergraduates,
self-ratings were obtained on a 9-place scale
for each of the 1,710 trait descriptors. Using
Goldberg's data, our next step was to obtain
the intercorrelations among terms selected to
be preliminary markers of each of the categories of interpersonal behavior. By a clustering procedure, a smaller and more homogeneous subset of items was selected within each
category, with approximately six items per
cluster.
The next step was to consider all items
that had been rationally classified as falling
within the 16 categories as potential candidates for addition to or deletion from each
nuclear interpersonal cluster. For this purpose, we scored the preliminary clusters as 16
scales and examined the correlations of individual items with these scales with an eye
toward their circumplex patterning. Thus, we
examined the correlation of each of the 567
items with the 16 preliminary clusters ordered
by their hypothetical position in the circumplex. Items were sought that had positive correlations with adjacent clusters, zero correlations with orthogonal clusters, and negative
correlations with opposite clusters. For most
items, this circumplex patterning across 16
clusters was far from perfect. Item selection
was further complicated by the fact that some
of the initial nuclear clusters were clearly out
of place on the circumplex, so that we constantly had to keep in mind the inadequacies
of our original clusters. By this bootstrap
procedure, we selected a set of eight adjectives
for each of the 16 vectors that, we hoped,
would increase the homogeneity of their vector
and correct the previous shortcomings of that
vector.
We assembled the 128 adjectives chosen to
mark the 16 vectors into a test format and
administered it to a small group of students
from the University of British Columbia. The
students were requested to rate the self-applicability of the adjectives on a 9-place Likert
scale. Item responses were summed for both
octant and sixteenth variables. Intercorrelations among the variables were factored by

401

the method of principal components. Figure
3 displays the pattern of octant variables
loading on the first two factors in the University of British Columbia sample. The pattern
of loadings for 16 interpersonal variables is
considerably less orderly than this, due no
doubt to the fact that the vector scores are
based on fewer items in a relatively small
sample of subjects. But the pattern of octant
scores clearly displays some of the difficulties
we encountered in our attempt to map out
Leary's (1957) system.
The most striking feature of Figure 3 is
the lack of variables in the upper right-hand
quadrant. This gap in the Leary (1957) circumplex has been previously noted by several
authors including Stern (1970), who felt that
the failure of Octants PA and NO to "close"
raises the question of whether the Leary system is a circumplex. Lorr and McNair (1965)
noted this gap also and attempted to close it
with additional substantive variables. Another notable departure from expectations is
the location of Octant NO, which not only
fails to appear in the upper quadrant but
appears below Octant LM. In a sense, then,
we partially succeeded in replicating the
Leary system with trait-descriptive adjectives,
but in so doing we carried over the faults of
the system as well.2
Development oj Bipolar Clusters
At this point it occurred to us that a 16variable circumplex can be rather easily constructed from eight genuine bipolar dimensions. One of the conceptual difficulties we
experienced in working with the Leary system was a decided lack of bipolarity between
vectors that appeared opposite each other on
the circle. In particular, the following implicitly bipolar contrasts did not make a
great deal of sense: success versus masochism,
narcissism versus conformity, rebellion versus
2

Juris I. Berzins (personal communication, March
8, 1977) plotted the loadings of the original Leary
(1957) Interpersonal Checklist (ICL) octants on the
first two principal components in samples of 685
high school students and 1,109 college students. The
plots for both samples are indistinguishable from
Figure 3. (See also Rinn, 1965, p. 458, Figure 6.)

402

JERRY S. WIGGINS

succ;ESSPOVVER
(PA )
)

NARCISSISM EXPLOITATION o
(BC)
PUNISHMENT HOSTILITY
( DE )

COLLABORATION •
LOVE
0
(LM)

°

TENDERNESS GENEROSITY
( NO)

REBELLION DISTRUST
(FG)
CONFORMITY
o TRUST
( JK)
MASOCHISM WEAKNESS
(HI)

Figure 3. Rotated components of Leary (1957) interpersonal variables.

tenderness, distrust versus generosity, and
punishment versus collaboration.
In Leary's (1957) original system the tenderness-generosity octant (NO) was conceptualized as the bipolar contrast to the rebellious-distrustful octant (FG). This likely accounts for the noticeable gap in the upper
right quadrant of the system (Figure 3).
Tenderness and generosity are not bipolar
contrasts to rebellious and distrustful behavior. Tenderness and generosity are too weak
and loving to be placed this high on the circle.
As Lorr and McNair (1965) noted earlier,
the NO octant, which falls between dominance
and love, reflects a socially exhibitionistic
style of behaving (gregarious-extraverted).
With a little effort, our revised representation of the 16 interpersonal variables can be
read from Figure 2. Each variable represents
a bipolar contrast to the variable appearing
opposite it on the circle. The contrasts are
dominant-submissive,
arrogant-unassuming,
calculating-ingenuous, cold-warm, quarrelsome-agreeable, aloof-gregarious, introvertedextraverted, and ambitious-lazy.
In developing our bipolar clusters, we attempted to select items that were highly negatively correlated with their opposite cluster
and that had zero correlations with their

theoretically orthogonal clusters. Thus, a
good dominant item should have a high positive correlation with a dominant cluster, a
high negative correlation with a submissive
cluster, and essentially zero correlations with
quarrelsome and agreeable clusters. We used
a tentative set of 16 four-item bipolar clusters
as markers to select items having the properties just described. This enabled us to revise and expand our tentative clusters into
eight-item variables. Factor analysis of these
eight-item variables in Goldberg's (Note 2)
sample of 187 subjects revealed the clearest
circumplex structure we had yet encountered
in our own work or in the literature. This result was replicated in an additional sample
of 119 subjects from the University of British
Columbia.
Development of Final Scales
The items in our eight-item bipolar interpersonal clusters were developed from the
pool of 567 adjectives classified as interpersonal in our initial rational sorting of the
total list of 1,710 adjectives. The possibility
clearly existed that some adjectives from
among the 1,143 not considered would be
appropriately placed within the 16 interper-

TAXONOMY OF INTERPERSONAL TRAITS

sonal categories. Consequently, a program
was written to examine the relationships between all 1,710 adjectives and the 16 bipolar
interpersonal clusters. The program correlates
each adjective with the 16 bipolar clusters,
selects the cluster with which the adjective
is most highly correlated, and then prints out
an ordered list of variables within each of the
16 categories. This listing provided the correlation of each item with the cluster with
which it was most highly correlated. It also
provided the correlation with the bipolar opposite cluster and with the two orthogonal
clusters. This procedure produced 16 lists
that located all 1,710 adjectives with respect
to the interpersonal cluster with which they
were most highly correlated.
Two of us then went through these lists
and examined the correlation of each item with
the cluster from the category to which it had
been assigned, as well as the correlation of
the item with its opposite and orthogonal
clusters.3 Items that clearly belonged in the
interpersonal category to which they had been
assigned were retained. Items that did not
appear to belong in the interpersonal category
to which they were assigned were placed in
one of eight other taxonomic categories that
then existed (e.g., temperament, character,
material traits, etc.).
At this point, an attempt was made to develop more refined subcategories within the
broader taxa. Preliminary groupings of clusters
were formed within the domains of temperament, character, attitudes, mental predicates,
and social roles. This classification added 38
new clusters to the 16 interpersonal clusters,
making a total of 54 categories within the
preliminary taxonomy. These 54 categories
were scored as scales by computing, for each
subject, the sum of his or her ratings to the
items in that category. In the case of the 16
interpersonal categories, the 25 best items, as
determined from item-cluster correlations,
form the reference scale for each category.
The next stage of analysis was designed to
determine more exactly the classification of
doubtful adjectives in the preceding taxonomic
sort. This included adjectives that were interpersonal but that seemed to be in the
wrong interpersonal category, adjectives that

403

were unclassifiable in any category, and adjectives that were candidates for deletion on
the grounds of ambiguity, obscurity, or lack
of personological relevance. In addition, all
adjectives in the interpersonal category other
than the 400 ( 1 6 X 2 5 ) marker adjectives
were classified as doubtful for the purpose of
this analysis. There were 768 such adjectives
designated as questionable by this criterion.
Each of the 768 adjectives was correlated with
all of the 54 taxonomic category scales. Two
of us then examined this pattern of correlations for all 768 words and assigned them to
one of the 54 categories on the basis of both
conceptual and empirical (correlational) considerations. Some items were retained in their
original interpersonal category, others moved
to other categories, and some deleted from
further consideration. By these procedures, a
revised 54-category taxonomy was developed.
Within this revised taxonomy, 864 adjectives
were classified as interpersonal.
The selection of items for inclusion in the
final interpersonal trait scales involved one
more cycle in our iterative procedures The
2S "best" items previously identified in each
of the 16 interpersonal categories were scored
as reference clusters. These reference clusters
provided a broader representation of the content of the final interpersonal variables than
did our earlier clusters. Within each category,
each item was correlated with its own 2 5-item
cluster and with its 25-item opposite and
orthogonal clusters. The items were then
ordered within each category by their correlations with their own clusters.
Working independently, three of us selected
the "best" eight items in each of the 16 interpersonal categories. One rater made selections strictly on the basis of a summary numerical index based on item correlations with
same, opposite, and orthogonal clusters, a
procedure referred to as empirical. Another
rater attended to the same item correlations,
but attempted to choose the more "meaningful" adjectives from pairs that had roughly
similar empirical characteristics, a procedure
3
I would like to acknowledge the substantial help
of Ana Holzmuller in this and many other phases of
the project.

404

JERRY S. WIGGINS

designated quasi-empirical. The third rater
selected sets of eight adjectives that were
"psychologically cohesive" in terms of his
conception of the constructs under investigation, the rational procedure.
The empirical and quasi-empirical itemselection procedures yielded sets of 16 scales
with highly similar psychometric properties.
For a specific sixteenth, it was possible to
identify one or the other of the two scales
as being preferable, either on grounds of a
higher alpha coefficient or on the grounds of
a better position in the 16-variable circumplex plot. Consequently, a combination set of
8 variables was formed from the best of the
empirical and quasiempirical sixteenths.
An additional procedure for item selection
was based on a more fine-grained analysis of
the circumplex properties of individual items.
Each item was correlated with the 16 25-item
clusters that served as markers of the interpersonal variables. This pattern of correlations was then inspected for the number of
departures from perfect circumplex ordering
that occurred. Items with the smallest number of departures from this pattern were retained in a set of scales labeled "item ordering."
The final selection of a 128-item set of interpersonal variables was based on an index
of circumplexity that permits comparison
among competing scale sets (Wiggins & Marston, Note 4). Very briefly, two factors were
extracted from the intercorrelations among
interpersonal variables in a given scale set. A
hypothetical factor matrix was constructed to
represent a perfect circumplex solution for
variables of this level of reliability (as estimated from communalities). The sum of the
absolute differences between elements in the
hypothetical factor matrix and elements in
the obtained factor matrix was taken as an
index of circumplexity. Each of the five sets
of interpersonal scales was then compared on
this index. Both octants and sixteenths were
evaluated in Goldberg's (Note 2) sample of
187 University of Oregon undergraduates and
in Norman's sample of 123 University of
Western Australia undergraduates, An overall index of circumplexity, based on both 8and 16-variable solutions in American and

Australian samples, suggested that the combination set of 128 adjectives had a slight
edge over the item-ordering, empirical, and
quasi-empirical procedures and a substantial
advantage over the rational procedure, which
fared rather badly. This combination set of
adjectives, which has been employed in all
subsequent investigations, is listed in Table 2.
Generalizability of Circumplex Structure
The present taxonomy of the interpersonal
domain is based on an explicit structural
model (Guttman, 1954) that follows from a
facet analysis of cognitive categories of social perception (Foa & Foa, 1974). On the
basis of both theoretical and psychometric
considerations, a set of eight 16-item scales
were developed as marker variables of the
principal vectors of this system. In addition
to being potentially useful personality assessment measures in their own right, these scales
enable one to classify any interpersonal trait
descriptor by establishing its location within
the circumplex space. However, the meaningfulness of such classification depends
heavily on the generalizability of the present
circumplex structure to samples other than
those involved in the derivation of the eight
interpersonal scales. The scales were derived
primarily from Goldberg's (Note 2) sample
of American students and cross-validated at
various stages in samples of Canadian students and in Norman's sample of Australian
students. Although relatively diverse samples
of students were employed in scale derivation, evidence for the generalizability of the
circumplex structure must come from other
sources. Four samples of subjects were tested
for this purpose.
Cross-Validation Samples
Sample A. Subjects were recruited by advertisements to participate in a "personality study" that involved two separate testing
sessions of approximately 2 hours each
(Marston, Note 5). Subjects were paid $10
each for their participation and were provided
individual feedback if requested. The 128 interpersonal adjectives were embedded in a

TAXONOMY OF INTERPERSONAL TRAITS

405

Table 2
Final Set of Interpersonal Adjective Scales
P. Ambitious
(Success)
Persevering
Persistent
Industrious
Self-disciplined
Organized
Deliberative
Stable
Steady

A. Dominant
(Power)
Dominant
Assertive
Forceful
Domineering
Firm
Self-confident
Self-assured
Un-self-conscious

B. Arrogant
(Narcissism)
Bigheaded
Boisterous
Conceited
Boastful
Overforward
Swellheaded
Cocky
Flaunty

C. Calculating
(Exploitation)

D. Cold
(Hate)
Warmthless
Unsympathetic
Ironhearted
Uncharitable
Coldhearted
Hardhearted
Cruel
Ruthless

E. Quarrelsome
(Hostility)
Impolite
Uncordial
Discourteous
Ungracious
Disrespectful
Uncooperative
Ill-mannered
Uncivil

F. Aloof
(Disaffiliation)
Antisocial
Unneighborly
Impersonal
Unsociable
Distant
Dissocial
Unsmiling
Uncheery

G. Introverted
(Withdrawal)
Silent
Shy
Introverted
Bashful
Inward
Unrevealing
Unsparkling
Undemonstrative

H. Lazy
(Failure)
Unproductive
Lazy
Unthorough
Unindustrious
Inconsistent
Disorganized
Unbusinesslike
Impractical

I. Submissive
(Weakness)
Self-doubting
Self-effacing
Timid
Meek
Unbold
Unaggressive
Forceless
Unauthoritative

J. Unassuming
(Modesty)
Nonegotistical
Undemanding
Unvain
Unwild
Unargumentative
Boastless
Pretenseless
Conceitless

K. Ingenuous
(Trust)
Uncunning
Uncalculating
Uncrafty
Unwily
Unsly
Guileless
Undevious
Undeceptive

L. Warm
(Love)
Tenderhearted
Gentlehearted
Tender
Kind
Emotional
Sympathetic
Softhearted
Appreciative

M. Agreeable
(Collaboration)
Courteous
Charitable
Well-mannered
Respectful
Cordial
Cooperative
Accommodating
Forgiving

N. Gregarious
(Affiliation)
Friendly
Genial
Neighborly
Companionable
Approachable
Congenial
Good-natured
Pleasant

O. Extraverted
(Outgoingness)
Outgoing
Extraverted
Vivacious
Jovial
Enthusiastic
Cheerful
Perky
Unshy

list of 60S adjectives whose order was randomized separately for each subject. Four
personality inventories were administered in
varying orders along with the total list of
adjectives. The 152 subjects (51 men and
101 women) included both undergraduate and
graduate students from a variety of academic
majors at the University of British Columbia.
Sample B. Representative samples of volunteer and professional workers were recruited
from three different social service agencies in

Sly

Tricky
Wily
Cunning
Overcunning
Crafty
Calculating
Exploitative

the Greater Vancouver area (Merritt, Note
6). The 128 interpersonal adjectives were administered in a single booklet along with a
value survey and a standardized personality
inventory. Testing was accomplished individually, in small groups, or on a take-home
basis. One hundred subjects (29 men and 71
women) completed the interpersonal adjective form.
Sample C. Students in the second term of
an introductory psychology class at the Uni-

JERRY S. WIGGINS

406
SAMPLE
PA
o

SAMPLE B

A

PA
o

o NO

o NO

BC o

BC o
o LM
DE o

DE o
o JK
FG o

o JK

FG o

o

o
HI

HI

PA
o

PA
o
BC o

o NO
o LM

ONO

BC o

o LM

DE o

DE o
FG o
O JK
o
HI

SAMPLE

o JK

FG
O

HI

C

SAMPLE

D

Figure 4. Structure of final interpersonal variables in four samples. (PA = ambitious-dominant;
BC = arrogant-calculating; DE — cold-quarrelsome; FG = aloof-introverted; HI = lazy-submissive ; JK = unassuming-ingenuous; LM — warm-agreeable.)

versity of British Columbia were administered
the 128 adjectives, embedded in a larger list
of adjectives, during a regular class period.
The students were given a guest lecture on
personality testing in exchange for their participation. Data were collected for 132 subjects (57 men and 75 women).
Sample D. Summer students enrolled in
an introductory psychology class at the University of British Columbia were administered
the 128 adjectives, embedded in a larger list,
during a regular class period. The students
later received their own standardized scores
on the interpersonal variables and a lecture
on interpersonal behavior. Data were collected
for 139 subjects (58 men and 81 women).
Circumplex Analyses
Intercorrelations were obtained among the
eight interpersonal adjective scales in each of
the four samples just described. Two prin-

cipal components were then extracted from
each of the intercorrelation matrices. In the
respective analyses, these two components accounted for 76.1% (Sample A), 67.9% (Sample B, 72.0% (Sample C), and 74.8% (Sample
D) of the total variance. For comparability
of inspection, the second component of each
solution was hand rotated to pass through
the ambitious-dominant vector (PA). Figure
4 depicts the loadings of the eight interpersonal scales on two hand-rotated principal
components in each of four samples.
Perfect, evenly spaced circumplexes (Figure 2) are not expected in real data, because
of measurement error, and hence the structures in Figure 4 are more properly described
as quasi-circumplexes (Guttman, 1954). Although the amount of "quasiness" one is
prepared to tolerate in empirical data is to
some extent a matter of taste, it seems fair
to say that the quasi-circumplex structures in

TAXONOMY OF INTERPERSONAL TRAITS

407

Table 3
Psychometric Characteristics of Interpersonal Adjective Scales
Internal consistency
(coefficient alpha)
Social desirability
Men
(n = 236)

Women
(n = 374)

label

M

SD

M

PA
BC
DE
FG
HI
JK
LM
NO

5.87
4.30
2. 95
4.28
3.95
4.64
6.64
6.17

.95
1.02
.89
1.19
.94
.93
.80
.96

5.72
3.60
2.48
3.87
4.13
5.14
7.08
6.54

rating

Total
(N = 610)

(N = 100)

SD

M

SD

M

SD

1.01
1.07
.80
1.17
1.01
1.00
.76
.96

5.79
3.87
2.66
4.03
4.06
4.95
6.91
6.40

.99
1.05
.84
1.17
.99
.97
.77
.96

6.77
3.66
2.31
3.54
3.37
5.73
7.53
7.52

1.10
.98
.81
.71
.61
.95
.73
.66

Total

Range of
values
from the

(N = 610) samples

.855
.870
.877
.891
.809
.801
.865
.897

.831-.880
.84S-.885
.862-.8S9
.887-.S94
.769-838
.743-.840
.841-.879
.887-.917

Note. Scale labels stand for ambitious-dominant (PA); arrogant-calculating (BC); cold-quarrelsome (DE); aloof-introverted
(FG); lazy-submissive (HI); unassuming-ingenuous (JK); warm-agreeable (LM); and gregarious-extraverted (NO).
ft
Scale values range from 1 (extremely inaccurate description) to 9 (extremely accurate description).

Figure 4 are among the clearest reported in
the personality literature to date. The circumplex ordering obtained in scale derivation
samples is generalizable across relatively diverse samples of subjects tested in differing
contexts. Hence, the eight scales may prove
useful both as measuring instruments and as
reference points for the classification of items
and scales in the interpersonal domain.
Psychometric Characteristics
Sex

Differences

Table 3 presents normative and psychometric data for each of the eight interpersonal
adjective scales. The first six columns contain means and standard deviations in a combined sample of 610 North American university students. Inspection of the separate means
for men and women reveals clear-cut, and to
some extent predictable, sex differences in
self-report. In comparison with women, men
present themselves as more ambitious-dominant, arrogant-calculating, cold-quarrelsome,
and aloof-introverted. Women present themselves as more lazy-submissive, unassumingingenuous, warm-agreeable, and gregariousextraverted. All of these mean differences are
statistically reliable. Surprisingly, the smallest
differences occur on ambitious-dominant (p
< .03) and lazy-submissive ( / > < . 0 1 ) ; all
other differences are highly reliable (p <
.0001).

Sex differences in self-report on the interpersonal circumplex provide a graphic representation of sex role stereotypes in North
American society (Wiggins & Holzmuller,
1978). These differences are sample dependent
and may possibly decrease in future years.
Samples of university students are not uniformly "stereotyped." They contain differing
proportions of complexly "sex-reversed" subjects, such as men who score high on lazysubmissive and on aloof-introverted and
women who score high on ambitious-dominant
and on gregarious-extraverted (Wiggins &
Holzmuller, Note 7).
Social Desirability
Social desirability ratings of the individual
adjectives were obtained from Norman's
monograph (Note 3). One hundred University of Michigan undergraduates (SO men and
SO women) rated the adjectives on a 9-place
social desirability rating scale. The means
and standard deviations for the 16 adjectives
in each scale appear in columns 7 and 8 of
Table 3. Comparing the total-sample mean
self-report scale scores with corresponding
mean social desirability ratings, it is clear that
the well-known relationship between endorsement and desirability is found within the interpersonal domain (Edwards, 19S7a). Moreover, the similarity between mean endorsement and mean desirability with respect to
the patterning or ordering of interpersonal

408

JERRY S. WIGGINS

variables is open to alternative interpretations
of the circumplex structure in terms of stylistic
response variables.4
A variety of procedures have been suggested for coping with the endorsement-desirability confound in self-report personality
data. On the assumption that in principle, responses within all interpersonal vectors should
be equiprobable, LaForge and Suczek (1955)
tried to write desirable phrases for undesirable dimensions ("Can be strict if necessary")
and undesirable phrases for desirable dimensions ("Spoils people with kindness"). Jackson's (1970) differential reliability index removes desirability variance and enhances content saturation at the stage of item selection.
Norman (Note 9) has described analysis of
variance procedures for removing desirability
variance from the Subject X Item response
matrix. Finally, several individual difference
measures of social desirability response style
have been constructed to permit the assessment of desirability responding for each subject (e.g., Crowne & Marlowe, 1960; Edwards,
1957b; Wiggins, 1959).
The extent to which an investigator may
feel the need to "correct for" the ubiquitous
endorsement-desirability confound will vary
with the purpose of the investigation and
with the investigator's theoretical stance on
the meaning of the evaluative dimension of
affective meaning. A set of interpersonal variables that did not differ in desirability (or
did not reveal sex differences) would be a
feeble representation of real-life categories
of social perception. On the other hand, basic
investigations of the process of responding to
personality inventory items may require variance decomposition procedures such as those
of Norman (Note 9). In any event, interpretations of individual or group scores on the interpersonal scales should be made with reference to normative data of the kind provided
in Table 3. Whether a person or a group
scores high on warm-agreeable or low on
cold-quarrelsome can be judged only with
reference to the scores of others.
Internal Consistency
In the selection of item sets to mark the
vectors of the interpersonal domain, the prin-

cipal itemmetric criterion was that of structural fidelity (Loevinger, 1957). By a variety
of procedures, we attempted to ensure that
each item selected was properly located with
reference to a circumplex that we had adopted
as the most appropriate measurement model
for representing the relationships among categories of interpersonal perception. Items were
also selected that had relatively high correlations with appropriate preliminary scales.
Final scales thus constructed are likely to
be internally consistent, although this must
be demonstrated rather than assumed.
The next-to-last column of Table 3 presents
coefficient alpha (Cronbach, 1951) estimates
of internal consistency for each of the interpersonal scales in a combined sample of university students. The final column of the table
indicates the range of alpha coefficients obtained in the four samples that constituted the
combined student group. Although some of
the interpersonal scales are more reliable
than others, all of them meet a reasonably
stringent requirement of acceptable internal
consistency (a > .80). The range of alpha
coefficients in the different samples tends to
be small, and this, together with the representativeness with which the universe of content was sampled, makes it reasonable to assume that the mean alpha values reported
are good estimates of the characteristic degree
of interitem structure for the different interpersonal variables (Loevinger, 1957). In this
respect, the extraversion-introversion dimension (NO-FG) is the most internally cohesive,
and the variables of unassuming-ingenuous
(JK) and lazy-submissive (HI) are the least.
Discussion
The long-range goal of the research reported in this article was the development of
a psychological taxonomy that would encompass the approximately 4,000 relatively familiar trait-descriptive terms identified by
4
For example, Douglas N. Jackson (personal communication, November 27, 1975) is convinced that
the present interpersonal circumplex structure, as
well as others reported in the literature, can be
accounted for in terms of his threshold theory of
desirability responding (Rogers, 1971; Jackson, Note
8).

TAXONOMY OF INTERPERSONAL TRAITS

Norman (Note 3). The research strategy
adopted for this task relied heavily on certain a priori distinctions between different
domains of human characteristics. In the present work, the domain of interpersonal traits
was defined in such a way as to distinguish
it from other domains such as temperament,
character, moods, and cognitive traits. These,
or similar, distinctions have been made by
most personality theorists concerned with
taxonomic issues (e.g., Allport, 1937; Cattell,
1950; Murray, 1938). However within the
interpersonal domain, the adoption of a
two-dimensional real-space circumplex model
(Benjamin, 1974) to capture the interrelationships among trait terms represents a personal methodological preference that is perhaps not as widely shared. On the basis of
the work reported in this article, it seems
fair to conclude that the domain of interpersonal trait descriptors can be classified, quite
precisely, with reference to a circumplex model
—a conclusion that was not obvious when we
began. Since there are, no doubt, many other
ways in which the interpersonal domain could
be classified, under different definitions and
different models, the specific advantages of the
present framework must be discussed in more
detail.
Two-dimensional circular orderings of interpersonal variables have been reported in the
literature for more than 40 years (Schaefer,
1961), and the general conceptual model underlying this structure can be traced as far
back as Galen (Roback, 1928). Remarkable
"convergences" in conception and structure
have been noted for studies varying widely
in variables, populations, and measurement
procedures (Foa, 1961; Schaefer, 1961; Wiggins, 1968). These convergences do not stem
from the similarity of generative mechanisms
postulated by different theorists (needs, interests, dynamisms, etc.) to account for surface patterns. Instead, the convergences reflect a set of semantic categories that impart
a common meaning to social events observed
by a variety of procedures. The categories
distinguished by the ordinary language of personality are not sharply demarcated, and
they are perhaps best thought of as "fuzzy
sets" (Zadeh, Fu, Tanaka, & Shimura, 1975)

409

rather than as precise logical distinctions. The
circumplex model appears to be particularly
well suited for representing elements (in the
present case, adjectives) whose class membership is continuous rather than discrete.
Although often working in apparent isolation from one another, numerous investigators
have proposed highly similar models of interpersonal behavior for the study of parents
(Chance, 1959; Roe & Siegelman, 1963;
Schaefer, 1959), children (Baumrind & Black,
1967; Becker & Krug, 1964; Schaefer & Bayley, 1963), parents and children (Benjamin,
1974; Foa, Triandis, & Katz, 1966), normal
and abnormal adults (Leary, 1957; Lorr &
McNair, 1963), psychotics (Lorr, Klett, &
McNair, 1963), and college students (Stern,
1970). Within many of these diverse programs of research, the circumplex model has
provided a nomological network that has
enhanced the meaning and significance of
the separate interpersonal variables employed
(Schaefer, 1961). Unfortunately, the potential
of the circumplex as an integrative conceptual
model has not been as widely recognized by
those whose research paradigms have focused
on the intensive study of single dimensions in
personality and social psychology.
In a recent book that presents summaries
of research on the major dimensions of personality, the editors state:
There obviously has been no overarching plan or
theory, implicit or explicit, guiding the selection of
topics for trait researchers. Indeed, the editors were
forced to organize the book by means of the unsophisticated tactic of simply placing the chapters in
alphabetical order. (London & Exner, 1978, p. xiv)

But surely the major research topics in contemporary personality and social psychology
such as achievement and power (PA), Machiavellianism (BC), aggression (DE), introversion (FG), obedience (HI), interpersonal
trust (JK), altruism and helping behavior
(LM), affiliation and extraversion (NO)—
can be related to each other by schemes more
sophisticated than the alphabet. This is not
to claim an established isomorphism between
the research topics just enumerated and the
present interpersonal taxonomy; rather, it is
to illustrate the kinds of questions whose
answers might bring conceptual clarity to

410

JERRY S. WIGGINS

both taxonomic and experimental research.
For example, once it is recognized that the
dimensions measured by Bern's (1974) masculinity and femininity scales are the orthogonal interpersonal dimensions of ambitious-dominant (PA) and warm-agreeable
(LM), then the issue of the "independence"
of masculinity and femininity, so conceived, is
seen in a new light (Wiggins & Holzmuller,
1978).
The alphabetical list of human "needs"
provided by Henry Murray (1938) has proved
to be an exceptionally fertile source of personality dimensions. Within the framework of
Murray's personology, several of these dimensions have been studied in considerable depth
(e.g., Atkinson, 1958; McClelland, 1961;
Winter, 1973), although little attention has
been given to the interrelationships among
the needs in the overall system, perhaps because an alphabetical taxonomy provides no
guidance in this matter. Needs selected from
Murray's list have formed the basis for two
multiscale inventories (Edwards, 1959; Jackson, 1967) and for scoring keys on an adjective checklist (Gough & Heilbrun, 1965).
There appears to be a consistent factor structure associated with the dozen needs these
instruments happen to share in common, but
attempts to interpret this structure have not
been particularly enlightening from a substantive point of view (Huba & Hamilton, 1976).
In contrast, the strangely neglected work of
Stern (1958, 1970) presents convincing evidence that a circumplex model provides a
meaningful representation of the full range of
Murray's need variables.
Two-dimensional circumplex models may
have utility outside the realm of ordinary
language-trait description associated with personality inventories and adjective checklists.
The circular ordering of intercorrelations
among clinical scales from the MMPI has
been noted (Schaefer, 1961), and it has
been argued that these scales can be interpreted within a two-dimensional circular
model of personality (Kassebaum, Couch,
& Slater, 1959). Given the manner in which
the MMPI clinical scales were constructed,
this argument appears rather farfetched on
initial consideration. However, a recent study

by Plutchik and Platman (1977) suggests a
possible reason why this might be the case.
Twelve trait-descriptive adjectives were selected to represent an interpersonal circumplex (Schaefer, 1961). Psychiatrists were
then asked to rate seven diagnostic categories
(e.g., paranoid, schizoid, hysterical) with respect to these adjectives. The mean adjective
profiles of the seven diagnostic categories were
intercorrelated, and two factors were extracted. The circular ordering of the diagnostic categories (Plutchik & Platman, 1977,
p. 421) bears a striking resemblance to the
circular ordering of corresponding MMPI
scales reported elsewhere (Schaefer, 1961, p.
135). The constellations of traits implied
by diagnostic labels can be represented by
a two-dimensional interpersonal circumplex
(Schaefer & Plutchik, 1966). To the extent
that the MMPI clinical scales reflect conventional diagnostic labeling, they too would be
expected to exhibit a circular ordering.
The present taxonomy of interpersonal
traits may prove useful to investigators who
employ single adjectives as stimulus materials
in studies of interpersonal perception, impression formation, and trait attribution. The
representativeness of the stimulus materials is
always an issue in such studies, and the present taxonomy provides a systematic basis for
sampling the entire domain of interpersonal
traits as an alternative to, for example, the
less differentiated strategy of sampling "favorable" traits. Elaborate sampling procedures
for the study of one or more specific dimensions of interpersonal behavior are made possible by the availability of a list of 864 terms
that have been classified within 16 categories.
The position of an adjective within a given
category is indexed by the correlation of that
adjective with its own, its opposite, and its
orthogonal clusters. In addition, the earlier
itemmetric work of Norman (Note 3) provides information on these same adjectives
with respect to such characteristics as social
desirability, difficulty level, self-endorsement,
and attributions to liked, indifferent, and disliked others. Although such itemmetric data
are useful primarily for calibration of stimulus materials, they may themselves be profit-

TAXONOMY OF INTERPERSONAL TRAITS

411

Bern, D. J., & Allen, A. On predicting some of the
people some of the time: The search for cross-situational consistencies in behavior. Psychological Review, 1974, 81, 506-520.
Bern, S. L. The measurement of psychological anReference Notes
drogyny. Journal of Consulting and Clinical Psychology, 1974,42, 115-162.
1. Wiggins, J. S. In defense of traits. Invited address Benjamin, L. S. Structural analysis of social beto the Ninth Annual Symposium on Recent Dehavior. Psychological Review, 1974, 81, 392-425.
velopments in the Use of the MMPI, Los Angeles, Carson, R. C. Interaction concepts of personality.
February 28, 1974.
Chicago: Aldine, 1969.
2. Goldberg, L. R. Language and personality: De- Cattell, R. B. Personality: A systematic, theoretical,
veloping a taxonomy of trait-descriptive terms.
and factual study. New York: McGraw-Hill, 1950.
Invited address to the Division of Evaluation and Cattell, R. B. Personality and motivation structure
and measurement. Yonkers-on-Hudson, N. Y.:
Measurement at the 86th Annual Convention of
World Book, 1957.
the American Psychological Association, San FranChance, E. Families in treatment; from the viewcisco, August 27, 1977.
point of the patient, the clinician and the re3. Norman, W. T. 2,800 personality trait descriptors:
searcher. New York: Basic Books, 1959.
Normative operating characteristics for a university population. Unpublished manuscript, Uni- Cronbach, L. J. Coefficient alpha and the internal
structure of tests. Psychometrika, 1951, 16, 297-334.
versity of Michigan, 1967.
Crowne,
D. P., & Marlowe, D. A new scale of social
4. Wiggins, J. S. & Marston, B. J. An index for
desirability independent of psychopathology. Jourevaluating circumplexity in two-dimensional realnal of Consulting Psychology, 1960, 24, 349-354.
space models. Unpublished manuscript, University
Edwards,
A. L. Social desirability and probability
of British Columbia, 1976.
of endorsement of items in the Interpersonal Check
5. Marston, B. J. Unpublished materials, University
List. Journal of Abnormal and Social Psychology,
of British Columbia, 1976.
1957, 55, 394-396. (a)
6. Merritt, N. G. Personality and value character- Edwards, A. L. The social desirability variable in
istics of volunteers and professionals at three difpersonality assessment and research. New York:
ferent social service agencies. Unpublished master's
Holt, Rinehart & Winston, 1957. (b)
thesis, University of British Columbia, 1977.
Edwards, A. L. Edwards Personal Preference Schedule. New York: Psychological Corporation, 1959.
7. Wiggins, J. S., & Holzmuller, A. Further evidence
on androgyny and interpersonal flexibility. Un- Foa, U. G. Convergences in the analysis of the
structure of interpersonal behavior. Psychological
published manuscript, University of British CoReview, 1961, 68, 341-353.
lumbia, 1978.
8. Jackson, D. N. A threshold model for stylistic re- Foa, U. G. New developments in facet design and
analysis. Psychological Review, 1965, 72, 262-274.
sponding. Paper presented at the 76th Annual
Convention of the American Psychological Associa- Foa, U. G., & Foa, E. B. Societal structures of the
mind. Springfield, 111.: Charles C Thomas, 1974.
tion, San Francisco, September 1968.
Foa,
U. G., Triandis, H. C., & Katz, E. W. Cross9. Norman, W. T. On decomposing personality ratcultural invariance in the differentiation and orings. Paper presented at the annual meeting of
ganization of family roles. Journal of Personality
the Society of Multivariate Experimental Psyand Social Psychology, 1966, 4, 316-327.
chology, London, Canada, November 7,1974.
Goldberg, L. R. Differential attribution of traitdescriptive terms to oneself as compared to wellliked,
neutral, and disliked others: A psychometric
References
analysis. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 1978, 36, 1012-1028.
Allport, G. W. Personality: A psychological interGough,
H. G., & Heilbrun, A. B. The Adjective
pretation. New York: Holt, 1937.
Check List manual. Palo Alto, Calif.: Consulting
Allport, G. W., & Odbert, H. S. Trait names: A
Psychologists Press, 1965.
psycho-lexical study. Psychological Monographs,
Guilford,
J. P. Personality. New York: McGraw-Hill,
1936, 47(1, Whole No. 211).
1959.
Atkinson, J. W. (Ed.). Motives in fantasy, action
and society. Princeton, N.J.: Van Nostrand, 1958. Guttman, L. A new approach to factor analysis: The
radex. In P. R. Lazarsfeld (Ed.), Mathematical
Baumrind, D., & Black, A. E. Socialization practices
thinking in the social sciences. Glencoe, 111.: Free
associated with dimensions of competence in prePress, 1954.
school boys and girls. Child Development, 1967,
Heider, F. The psychology of interpersonal relations.
38, 291-328.
New York: Wiley, 1958.
Becker, W. C., & Krug, R. S. A circumplex model for
social behavior in children. Child Development, Homans, G. C. Social behavior: Its elementary form.
1964, 35, 371-396.
New York: Harcourt, Brace, 1961.

ably studied for the light they shed on basic
issues of social perception (Goldberg, 1978).

412

JERRY S. WIGGINS

Huba, G. J., & Hamilton, D. L. On the generality of
trait relationships: Some analyses based on Fiske's
paper. Psychological Bulletin, 1976, 83, 868-876.
Jackson, D. N. Personality Research Form manual.
Goshen, N.Y.: Research Psychologists Press, 1967.
Jackson, D. N. A sequential system for personality
scale development. In C. D. Spielberger (Ed.),
Current topics in clinical and community psychology (Vol. 2). New York: Academic Press, 1970.
Kassebaum, G. G., Couch, A. S., & Slater, P. E.
The factorial dimensions of the MMPI. Journal
of Consulting Psychology, 1959, 23, 226-236.
Kelly, G. A. The psychology of personal constructs
(Vols. 1 & 2). New York: Norton, 19SS.
LaForge, R., & Suczek, R. The interpersonal dimension of personality: III. An interpersonal check
list. Journal of Personality, 195S, 24, 94-112.
Leary, T. Interpersonal diagnosis of personality.
New York: Ronald Press, 1957.
Loevinger, J. Objective tests as instruments of psychological theory. Psychological Reports, 1957, 3,
635-694 (Monograph No. 9).
London, H., & Exner, J. E., Jr. (Eds.). Dimensions
of personality. New York: Wiley, 1978.
Lorr, M., Klett, C. J., & McNair, D. M. Syndromes
of psychosis. New York: Macmillan, 1963.
Lorr, M., & McNair, D. M. An interpersonal behavior
circle. Journal of Abnormal and Social Psychology,
1963, 67, 68-75.
Lorr, M., & McNair, D. M. Expansion of the interpersonal behavior circle. Journal of Personality
and Social Psychology, 1965, 2, 823-830.
McClelland, D. C. The achieving society. Princeton,
N.J.: Van Nostrand, 1961.
Mischel, W. Personality and assessment. New York:
Wiley, 1968.
Murray, H. A. Explorations in personality. New
York: Oxford University Press, 1938.
Osgood, C. E. Speculation on the structure of interpersonal intentions. Behavioral Science, 1970, 15,
237-254.
Plutchik, R., & Platman, S. R. Personality connotations of psychiatric diagnoses. Journal of Nervous
and Mental Disease, 1977, 165, 418-422.
Rinn, J. L. Structure of phenomenal domains. Psychological Review, 1965, 72, 445-466.
Roback, A. A. The psychology of character. New
York: Harcourt, Brace, 1928.
Roe, A., & Siegelman, M. A parent-child questionnaire. Child Development, 1963, 34, 355-369.
Rogers, T. B. The process of responding to personality items: Some issues, a theory and some re-

search. Multivariate Behavioral Research Monographs, 1971, 6, No. 2.
Schaefer, E. S. A circumplex model for maternal
behavior. Journal of Abnormal and Social Psychology, 1959, 59, 226-235.
Schaefer, E. S. Converging conceptual models for
maternal behavior and child behavior. In J. C.
Glidewell (Ed.), Parental attitudes and child behavior. Springfield, 111.: Charles C Thomas, 1961.
Schaefer, E. S., & Bayley, N. Maternal behavior, child
behavior, and their intercorrelations from infancy
through adolescence. Monographs of the Society
for Research in Child Development, 1963, 28(3,
Whole No. 87).
Schaefer, E. S., & Plutchik, R. Interrelationships of
emotions, traits, and diagnostic constructs. Psychological Reports, 1966, 18, 399-410.
Stern, G. G. Preliminary manual: Activities IndexCollege Characteristics Index. Syracuse, N.Y.:
Syracuse University Psychological Research Center, 1958.
Stern, G. G. People in context: Measuring personenvironment congruence in education and industry. New York: Wiley, 1970.
Sullivan, H. S. The interpersonal theory of psychiatry. New York: Norton, 1953.
Webster's new international dictionary (2nd ed.,
unabridged). Springfield, Mass.: Merriam, 1924.
Webster's third new international dictionary of the
English language unabridged. Springfield, Mass.:
Merriam, 1961.
Wiggins, J. S. Interrelationships among MMPI measures of dissimulation under standard and social
desirability instructions. Journal of Consulting
Psychology, 1959, 23, 419-427.
Wiggins, J. S. Personality structure. Annual Review
of Psychology, 1968, 19, 293-350.
Wiggins, J. S., & Holzmuller, A. Psychological androgyny and interpersonal behavior. Journal of
Consulting and Clinical Psychology, 1978, 46, 4052.
Wiggins, J. S., Renner, K. E., Clore, G. L., & Rose,
R. J. The psychology of personality. Reading,
Mass.: Addison-Wesley, 1971.
Winter, D. G. The power motive. New York: Free
Press, 1973.
Zadeh, L. A., Fu, K.-S., Tanaka, K., & Shimura, M.
(Eds.). Fuzzy sets and their applications to cognitive and decision processes. New York: Academic Press, 1975.
Received April 14, 1978 •

