Personality and Social Psychology
Bulletin
http://psp.sagepub.com/

Promotion Orientation Explains Why Future-Oriented People Exercise and Eat Healthy: Evidence From the
Two-Factor Consideration of Future Consequences-14 Scale
Jeff Joireman, Monte J. Shaffer, Daniel Balliet and Alan Strathman
Pers Soc Psychol Bull 2012 38: 1272 originally published online 25 July 2012
DOI: 10.1177/0146167212449362
The online version of this article can be found at:
http://psp.sagepub.com/content/38/10/1272

Published by:
http://www.sagepublications.com

On behalf of:

Society for Personality and Social Psychology

Additional services and information for Personality and Social Psychology Bulletin can be found at:
Email Alerts: http://psp.sagepub.com/cgi/alerts
Subscriptions: http://psp.sagepub.com/subscriptions
Reprints: http://www.sagepub.com/journalsReprints.nav
Permissions: http://www.sagepub.com/journalsPermissions.nav

>> Version of Record - Sep 18, 2012
OnlineFirst Version of Record - Jul 25, 2012
What is This?

Downloaded from psp.sagepub.com at Maastricht University on May 28, 2014

449362
an et al.Personality and Social Psychology Bulletin

PSPXXX10.1177/0146167212449362Joirem

Promotion Orientation Explains Why
Future-Oriented People Exercise and Eat
Healthy: Evidence From the Two-Factor
Consideration of Future Consequences14 Scale

Personality and Social
Psychology Bulletin
38(10) 1272­–1287
© 2012 by the Society for Personality
and Social Psychology, Inc
Reprints and permission:
sagepub.com/journalsPermissions.nav
DOI: 10.1177/0146167212449362
http://pspb.sagepub.com

Jeff Joireman1, Monte J. Shaffer2, Daniel Balliet3, and Alan Strathman4

Abstract
The authors extended research linking individual differences in consideration of future consequences (CFC) with health
behaviors by (a) testing whether individual differences in regulatory focus would mediate that link and (b) highlighting the
value of a revised, two-factor CFC-14 scale with subscales assessing concern with future consequences (CFC-Future) and
concern with immediate consequences (CFC-Immediate) proper. Exploratory and confirmatory factor analyses of the revised
CFC-14 scale supported the presence of two highly reliable factors (CFC-Future and CFC-Immediate; αs from .80 to .84).
Moreover, structural equation modeling showed that those high in CFC-Future engage in exercise and healthy eating because
they adopt a promotion orientation. Future use of the two-factor CFC-14 scale is encouraged to shed additional light on how
concern with future and concern with immediate consequences (proper) differentially impact the way people resolve a host
of intertemporal dilemmas (e.g., health, financial, and environmental behavior).
Keywords
consideration of future consequences, regulatory focus, exercise, healthy eating, scale development
Received September 28, 2011; revision accepted March 13, 2012

Many health behaviors pose a conflict between the shortterm and long-term consequences of one’s actions. For
example, in the short run, exercise and healthy eating can
require people to sacrifice things that give them pleasure
such as sleeping in and eating delicious, high-fat foods. In
the long run, however, exercise and healthy eating benefit
the individual. Unfortunately, as the growing obesity epidemic confirms, many people fail to exercise and eat healthy
foods, suggesting they are either strongly influenced by the
immediate consequences of their actions or they fail to consider the long-term benefits of exercise and healthy eating.

Consideration of Future Consequences
(CFC) and Health Behavior
Given their intertemporal nature, one factor that predicts
health behaviors is an individual’s CFC (i.e., the extent to
which people consider the potential distant outcomes of their
current behaviors and are influenced by those potential outcomes; Strathman, Gleicher, Boninger, & Edwards, 1994).
For example, relative to those scoring low, those scoring high

on the CFC scale are more likely to exercise (Adams &
Nettle, 2009; Ouellette, Hessling, Gibbons, Reis-Bergan, &
Gerrard, 2005); control their diet (Piko & Brassai, 2009);
report a lower body mass index (BMI; Adams & Nettle,
2009; Adams & White, 2009); accept free sunscreen (Orbell
& Kyriakaki, 2008); limit sun exposure (Heckman, Wilson,
& Ingersoll, 2009); use a condom (Appleby et al., 2005; Dorr,
Krueckeberg, Strathman, & Wood, 1999); get tested for HIV
(Dorr et al., 1999), diabetes (Crockett, Weinman, Hankins, &
Marteau, 2009; Orbell & Hagger, 2006), and colorectal cancer (Orbell, Perugini, & Rakow, 2004); vaccinate their
daughters against cervical cancer (Morison, Cozzolino, &
1

Washington State University, Pullman, USA
University of Arizona, Tucson, USA
3
VU University, Amsterdam, Netherlands
4
University of Missouri–Columbia, USA
2

Corresponding Author:
Jeff Joireman, Department of Marketing, Washington State University,
Pullman, WA 99164-4730, USA
Email: joireman@wsu.edu

Downloaded from psp.sagepub.com at Maastricht University on May 28, 2014

1273

Joireman et al.
Orbell, 2010); take actions to prevent future occurrence of
past illnesses (Sirois, 2004); and quit smoking (Kovač &
Rise, 2007). High CFCs are also less likely to use alcohol and
tobacco (Adams & Nettle, 2009; Daugherty & Brase, 2010;
Rappange, Brouwer, & Van Exel, 2009; Strathman et al.,
1994) and expose themselves to environments promoting
hearing loss (i.e., discotheques; Vogel, Brug, Van der Ploeg,
& Raat, 2010).1
Moving beyond main effects, many CFC/health behavior
studies have taken an “interactionist” perspective. For example, Ouellette et al. (2005) examined how self-generated prototypes (of other exercisers) versus ideal possible selves (of
the self in the future) influenced exercise behaviors of low
versus high CFCs. Ouellette et al. hypothesized that ideal
possible selves (of the self in the future) would be more motivating for high CFCs than for low CFCs, as the ideal possible
self is a version of the self that exists in the future. As predicted, high CFCs (but not low CFCs) increased exercise
behavior after first considering ideal selves (but not prototypes of other exercisers). Although not predicted, results also
showed that low CFCs increased exercise behavior when they
considered prototypes of other exercisers (but not ideal
selves), which the authors suggest makes sense, in that low
CFCs focus on the “here and now” and prototypes are “very
much based in the present” (Ouellette et al., 2005; p. 617).
As another example, Orbell and her colleagues have
reported a series of studies showing that high CFCs are more
likely to engage in screening for diabetes (Orbell & Hagger,
2006) and colorectal cancer (Orbell et al., 2004), and accept
free sunscreen (Orbell & Kyriakaki, 2008) when health messages emphasize the long-term benefits of these actions, while
low CFCs are more likely to take the same actions when health
messages emphasize the short-term benefits of these actions.
Additional studies support this CFC × Tailored message
approach (e.g., Kees, Burton, & Tangari, 2010; O’Connor,
Warttig, Conner, & Lawton, 2009; Strathman et al., 1994).
Finally, several studies have explored mediators between
CFC and health behaviors. Such studies have focused on the
mediating effect of positive/negative thoughts about cancer
(Morison et al., 2010), how procrastination mediates between
CFC and health behavior intentions (Sirois, 2004), and how
attitudes, subjective norms, behavior control, and thoughts in
response to persuasive messages mediate the impact of the
CFC × Message framing interaction on health intentions
(Orbell et al., 2004; Orbell & Hagger, 2006; Orbell &
Kyriakaki, 2008).2

opposed to a one-factor model (e.g., Adams, 2012; Joireman,
Balliet, Sprott, Spangenberg, & Schultz, 2008; Petrocelli,
2003; Rappange et al., 2009; Toepoel, 2010). Second, with the
few exceptions noted above, little research has attempted to
identify mechanisms through which CFC predicts various
health behaviors. The present studies address these limitations
by reexamining the nature of the CFC construct and testing the
hypothesis that CFC predicts an individual’s chronic regulatory focus orientation (i.e., promotion vs. prevention; Higgins
et al., 2001), which in turn predicts exercise and healthy eating
attitudes and intentions. Because the distinction between the
two CFC subscales is central to our theoretical development,
we first consider measurement of the CFC construct.

CFC: One Factor or Two?
Strathman and colleagues (1994) developed a 12-item scale to
measure individual differences in CFC (Items 1-12 in the
appendix). In keeping with its original conception, the majority
of prior research has treated the CFC scale as a unidimensional
scale (i.e., an average or sum of the future items and the
reverse-coded immediate items). Recently, however, several
studies have found that a two-factor model best explains
responses to the scale (Adams, 2012; Joireman et al., 2008;
Petrocelli, 2003; Rappange et al., 2009; Toepoel, 2010; for an
exception, see Hevey et al., 2010). Arguably, the clearest twofactor solution distinguishes between a 7-item CFC-Immediate
subscale and a 5-item CFC-Future subscale (Adams, 2012;
Joireman et al., 2008; Rappange et al., 2009; Toepoel, 2010).
A two-factor distinction implies that, although individuals may
develop a dominant temporal orientation, concern with future
and concern with immediate consequences are not polar opposites; that is to say, individuals may consider the future consequences of their actions, the immediate consequences of their
actions, or both (for a similar line of reasoning, see Shipp,
Edwards, & Lambert, 2009; Zimbardo & Boyd, 1999).
Although there appears to be growing support for a twofactor solution, distinguishing between CFC-Future and
CFC-Immediate subscales has at least two disadvantages.
First, personality researchers have often been criticized for
unnecessarily adding new constructs to the large nomological net of existing constructs. Second, a two-factor solution
complicates a researcher’s conceptualization and data analysis. Despite these concerns, distinguishing between the two
CFC subfactors has several practical and theoretical advantages, as outlined below.

Gaps in the CFC–Health Behavior
Literature

Practical and Theoretical Advantages of
the Two-Factor Distinction

The preceding studies demonstrate that CFC predicts a range
of health behaviors. At the same time, research linking CFC
and health behaviors has at least two important gaps. First,
there is growing debate regarding the factor structure of the
CFC scale, with several studies arguing for a two-factor as

One advantage of a two-factor solution is that it allows
researchers to determine whether consideration of future
consequences (proper) is responsible for a given behavior, or
whether the behavior is, in fact, better predicted by a consideration of immediate consequences. If researchers adopt a

Downloaded from psp.sagepub.com at Maastricht University on May 28, 2014

1274		

Personality and Social Psychology Bulletin 38(10)

one-factor solution, they reverse code the immediate items
and average them with the future items, resulting in a single
“CFC score.” Although this single CFC score may predict a
given behavior, the appropriate interpretation of this CFC/
behavior relationship is not always clear.
For example, assume that the single CFC score correlates
at r = .50 with exercise. Using the traditional (one-factor)
interpretation, one would be tempted to conclude that “people who are concerned with the future consequences of their
actions are more likely to exercise.” This reasoning is
apparently logical, as the scale is called the “Consideration
of Future Consequences Scale,” but a closer look reveals
another interpretation: It is possible that the positive correlation between CFC and exercise is actually driven exclusively
by the immediate items. In other words, a positive correlation
between CFC and exercise behavior may occur because
“people who are concerned with the immediate consequences
of their actions are less likely to exercise.”
By merging the immediate and future items into a single
CFC score, as has typically been done, a researcher could be
overlooking an important conclusion: Exercise is not driven
by a concern with future consequences (e.g., long-term
health benefits) but rather by a concern with immediate consequences (e.g., inconvenience). The latter interpretation
would have dramatically different implications. The first
interpretation suggests that interventions aimed at increasing
exercise should focus on convincing people to care about the
long-term consequences of exercise (i.e., health benefits
exercise can bring). In contrast, the second interpretation
suggests that interventions aimed at increasing exercise
should focus on decreasing people’s concern with immediate
consequences or eliminating those immediate negative consequences altogether.
A second and related advantage of the two-factor solution
is that it allows researchers to test competing models regarding how CFC is related to a given outcome. For example, in
their article on CFC, ego depletion, and self-control, Joireman
et al. (2008) articulated two competing theoretical models
based on the distinction between CFC-Immediate and CFCFuture subscales. Briefly stated, the susceptibility model
assumes that a high level of CFC-Immediate makes one susceptible to self-control failure, whereas the buffering model
assumes that a high level of CFC-Future buffers one against
self-control failure. As we note below, several studies have
supported a two-factor distinction and highlighted the value
of the susceptibility and buffering models.

Empirical Support for the
Two-Factor Distinction
Most studies on the factor structure of the CFC scale have
focused exclusively on factor analyses. Albeit important, construct validity studies (Marsh, 1996) that explore whether the
distinction between the factors matters (i.e., do the CFC subscales differentially relate to various outcomes of interest?)

are also critical in determining the value of a two-factor distinction.
For example, Joireman et al. (2008) reported a large-scale
confirmatory factor analysis supporting the two-factor solution, a correlational study showing that trait self-control was
only predicted by the CFC-Immediate subscale, and an
experiment showing that the CFC-Immediate subscale moderated the impact of ego depletion (Baumeister, Muraven, &
Tice, 2000) on temporal discounting. Results showed that
CFC’s relationship with self-control and temporal discounting is due to a high concern with the immediate consequences
of behavior rather than low concern with the future consequences of behavior, supporting the susceptibility model.
A more recent study linking CFC with compulsive buying
tendencies and credit card debt provided additional support
for the susceptibility model (Joireman, Kees, & Sprott,
2010). In that study, high levels of CFC-Immediate magnified the impact of compulsive buying tendencies on credit
card debt, whereas the CFC-Future subscale did not predict
credit card debt, consistent with Joireman et al.’s (2008)
findings in the domain of self-control.
Finally, Rappange et al. (2009, Table 3) reported results
more in line with the buffering model, in that the CFC-Future
subscale tended to be a better predictor than the CFCImmediate subscale of various health beliefs (e.g., “If I live
unhealthy, I may die sooner”) and behaviors (e.g., selfreported healthy eating and exercise). Rappange et al. summarized their results by stating, “The important conclusion
from [our] findings is that the underlying factors explain different aspects of (health) behavior and, therefore, their distinction is important” (p. 577).
In sum, theoretical and empirical arguments support the
distinction between CFC-Future and CFC-Immediate subscales. However, as Joireman et al. (2008) noted, the reliability of the five-item CFC-Future subscale is often
suboptimal (<.70). Accordingly, we added two items to the
CFC-Future subscale and evaluated the validity of the
revised CFC-14 scale using exploratory and confirmatory
factor analysis. As outlined next, we also tested whether
promotion versus prevention regulatory styles mediate the
CFC subscales’ relationships with exercise and healthy eating attitudes and intentions.

Linking Individual Differences in
CFC With Regulatory Focus
Regulatory focus theory (Higgins, 1997; Higgins et al.,
2001) proposes that people can adopt one of two goal pursuit
strategies. A promotion orientation facilitates achieving
ideal goals (hopes and aspirations) by focusing an individual’s efforts on eagerly achieving positive outcomes. A prevention orientation facilitates achieving ought goals (duties
and responsibilities) by focusing an individual’s efforts on
vigilantly avoiding negative outcomes. Some studies treat
regulatory focus as a state that can be momentarily primed

Downloaded from psp.sagepub.com at Maastricht University on May 28, 2014

1275

Joireman et al.
by the situation (e.g., Cesario, Grant, & Higgins, 2004).
Other studies, like ours, treat regulatory focus as a stable
individual difference (e.g., Higgins et al., 2001; Zhao &
Pechmann, 2007).
As we explain below, the goal-directed strategies involved
in a promotion orientation—ideals, hopes and aspirations,
eagerly seeking gains—are likely to arise out of a broader
tendency to focus on the future consequences of one’s
actions, whereas the goal-directed strategies inherent in a
prevention focus—oughts, duties and responsibilities, and
vigilantly avoiding losses—are likely to arise out of a broader
tendency to focus on the immediate consequences of one’s
actions. Restated, theoretical and empirical considerations
suggest that people scoring high on the CFC-Future scale
will tend to adopt a promotion orientation, whereas those
scoring high on the CFC-Immediate scale will tend to adopt
a prevent orientation.

Ideal Versus Ought Self-Guides and CFC
First, those who focus on the future consequences of their
actions should be more likely to adopt ideal self-goals
(hopes, aspirations), as ideal goals tend to be abstract and
distal, and such construals are more in line with (i.e., provide
a better fit with) a future orientation (Fessel, 2011; Trope &
Liberman, 2003). For example, (future-oriented) Julie might
exercise because she wants to be “in ideal shape.” Being in
ideal shape could mean meeting any number of criteria, such
as enhanced cardiovascular functioning, firm muscles, or a
sense that she is physically fit. Although some of these criteria can be objectively assessed (e.g., cardiovascular functioning via VO2 max), the range of possible values that
qualify as “in shape” may vary considerably from person
to person, suggesting that ideal goals tend to be abstract.
Moreover, pursuing ideal self-goals typically requires sustained effort over a long period of time, as there is always
room for improvement toward an ever higher ideal. In sum,
ideal self-goals typically involve striving toward an abstract
future goal, which is more appealing for people who consider the future consequences of their actions.
By comparison, people who tend to focus on the immediate consequences of their actions should be more likely to
adopt ought self-goals (duties and responsibilities), as these
goals tend to be more concrete and proximal, and these construals are more in line with (i.e., provide a better fit with) a
present orientation (Fessel, 2011; Trope & Liberman, 2003).
For example, (present-oriented) John might exercise because
important people in his life think he “should” exercise. When
John does exercise, his friends and family may provide
immediate positive feedback (e.g., it’s great that you’re getting into the gym!), and when he does not exercise, his peers
may provide immediate negative feedback (e.g., we didn’t
see you in the gym yesterday). Regardless of the valence of
that feedback, the important point is that the feedback John

receives is concrete and (relatively) more immediate (than
the long-term gains associated with the ideal self). In sum,
ought self-goals more often involve striving toward a concrete immediate goal, which is more appealing for people
who consider the immediate consequences of their actions.

Eager Pursuit of Gains Versus Vigilant
Avoidance of Losses and CFC
Regulatory focus theory’s emphasis on eagerly seeking
positive outcomes versus vigilantly avoiding negative outcomes is also relevant to the CFC construct. For example,
an eager pursuit of gains implies a willingness to move away
from the (present) status quo in service of obtaining better
but potentially uncertain positive future outcomes.
Willingness to pursue such (uncertain) outcomes presumably rests in turn on optimism for the hoped-for future outcome. When one sets future goals, one tends to focus on
potential successes (Gilovich, Kerr, & Medvec, 1993) and
find it easier to envision a better possible future (Pennington
& Roese, 2003; Snyder, Rand, & Ritschel, 2006). For
example, assuming that Julie routinely considers the future
consequences of her actions, she may be more optimistic
that exercise will lead to the positive outcomes associated
with her ideal goals, and she may be more likely to set realistic goals and use more effective strategies for achieving
those goals (Sohl & Moyer, 2009).
By comparison, vigilant avoidance of losses implies a
constant monitoring of threats to one’s present outcomes.
This is important, because when people think about achieving an outcome in the near future, they tend to focus on
possible failures (more than possible successes; Gilovich
et al., 1993). This more pessimistic perspective may reduce
thoughts about possible ideal goals and shift one’s focus
onto actions that are necessary to maintain security and
support the status quo (Hazlett, Molden, & Sackett, 2011).
For example, if John routinely considers the immediate
consequences of his actions, he may be disinclined to strive
for future ideals and more likely to set immediate goals
related to security (e.g., approval from peers). John’s tendency to focus on immediate outcomes may also make him
more likely to accept smaller, immediate outcomes rather
than striving for larger, delayed outcomes (i.e., to pursue
the status quo).

Empirical Support for the Overlap Between the CFC
Subscales and Regulatory Focus Orientations
Several studies support the line of reasoning just advanced.
To help organize these studies, Table 1 summarizes key differences between promotion and prevention orientations and highlights studies illustrating the overlap between each of these
orientations and the CFC construct. For example, with regard to
self-guides, as noted earlier, Ouellette and her colleagues (2005)

Downloaded from psp.sagepub.com at Maastricht University on May 28, 2014

1276		

Personality and Social Psychology Bulletin 38(10)

Table 1. Overlap Between Regulatory Focus Orientations and CFC Subscales
Distinguishing feature

Promotion
orientation

Prevention
orientation

Self-guide

Ideal self

Ought self

End goals

Obtaining gains

Avoiding losses

Cognitive style

Eager/optimistic

Vigilant/pessimistic

Evidence linking promotion orientation with high CFC-Future and
prevention orientation with high CFC-Immediate
Ideal self is more motivating for high CFCs; prototypes (normative
concerns) are more motivating for low CFCs (Ouellette, Hessling,
Gibbons, Reis-Bergan, & Gerrard, 2005)
High CFC-Future predicts tendency to seek larger, uncertain
outcomes over smaller, certain outcomes (Joireman & Balliet,
2012); high CFC-Immediate predicts tendency to seek smaller,
immediate outcomes over larger, delayed outcomes (Joireman,
Balliet, Sprott, Spangenberg, & Schultz, 2008)
High CFC predicts greater dispositional optimism (O’BrienMcElwee & Brittain, 2009; Strathman, Gleicher, Boninger, &
Edwards, 1994); high CFC-Immediate predicts greater dispositional
hostility (Joireman, Anderson, & Strathman, 2003, based on
reanalysis at CFC subscale level)

Note: CFC = Consideration of Future Consequences. When results for the CFC subscales were reported (or data were available for reanalysis), analyses
involved multiple regressions predicting the outcome of interest from the CFC subscales. Conclusions in the final column only mention a CFC subscale if
it was a significant predictor.

found that those scoring high in CFC were more motivated
to exercise after contemplating their ideal future self,
whereas those low in CFC were more motivated to exercise
after contemplating prototypes of other exercisers (which
presumably highlighted normative concerns of what one
“should do”). With regard to end goals, research has shown
that those scoring high on the CFC-Future subscale are more
likely than those scoring low on the CFC-Future subscale to
forgo smaller, certain rewards in favor of larger but less
certain rewards (Joireman & Balliet, 2012), consistent with
the idea that CFC-Future is associated with a tendency to
focus on “pursuing (uncertain) gains.” Similarly, research
has shown that those scoring high on the CFC-Immediate
subscale are more likely to opt for smaller, immediate
rewards over larger, delayed rewards (Joireman et al., 2008),
consistent with the idea that CFC-Immediate is associated
with a tendency to focus on “preventing (immediate)
losses.” Finally, with regard to cognitive styles, research has
shown that those scoring high in CFC are more optimistic
than those scoring low in CFC (O’Brien-McElwee &
Brittain, 2009; Strathman et al., 1994), suggesting connections with an “eager” style. On the other hand, high scores
on the CFC-Immediate subscale are associated with higher
trait hostility (Joireman, Anderson, & Strathman, 2003, data
reanalyzed at the subscale level), suggesting connections
with a more “vigilant” style.
Complementing the above “common correlates,” research
has also shown that consumers who are considering a distant purchase prefer promotion-framed products, whereas
those who are considering an immediate purchase prefer
prevention-framed products (Mogilner, Aaker, & Pennington,
2008). Even more directly relevant, Zacher and de Lange

(2011) reported that future time orientation is positively
correlated with a promotion orientation, whereas present
time orientation is positively correlated with a prevention
orientation though, as we note below, the authors’ conceptualization of time orientation was not identical to our focus
on CFC.

Hypotheses
Based on the CFC/health behavior reviewed at the outset of
our article, we predicted that the CFC-Future (CFCImmediate) subscale would be positively (negatively) correlated with exercise and healthy eating attitudes and
intentions. Building on the theoretical and empirical considerations just presented, we further hypothesized that those
scoring high in CFC-Future should be more likely than those
scoring low in CFC-Future to (chronically) adopt a promotion orientation, while those scoring high on CFC-Immediate
should be more likely than those scoring low on CFCImmediate to (chronically) adopt a prevention orientation.
Finally, following this reasoning, we tested the hypothesis
that promotion orientation would mediate the link between
CFC-Future and exercise/healthy eating outcomes, whereas
prevention orientation would mediate the link between CFCImmediate and exercise/healthy eating outcomes.

Competing Hypotheses
Although the studies just reviewed provide conceptual support for our hypothesis, at least two studies have shown
that those scoring high in CFC are more likely than those
scoring low to respond favorably to “vigilant” messages. In

Downloaded from psp.sagepub.com at Maastricht University on May 28, 2014

1277

Joireman et al.
one study, Kees et al. (2010) showed that low and high
CFCs had similar risk perceptions and attitudes toward ads
promoting a healthy diet and exercise using an “eager”
style (e.g., seek healthy foods, seek exercise), whereas high
CFCs had higher risk perceptions and more favorable attitudes toward ads using a vigilant strategy (e.g., avoid
unhealthy foods, avoid inactivity). In another study, high
CFCs spent more time reading information on testing for
hypertension when the information was presented in a loss
frame, whereas low CFCs spent more time reading the
information when it was presented in a gain frame
(O’Connor et al., 2009). Taken together, these studies suggest a competing set of hypotheses, namely, that high levels of CFC-Future will be related to a prevention orientation,
whereas high levels of CFC-Immediate will be related to a
promotion orientation.
We should also note that Zacher and de Lange’s (2011)
study mentioned earlier suggested that regulatory focus
(Lockwood, Jordan, & Kunda, 2002) precedes time orientation (Lang & Carstensen, 2002). Although Zacher and de
Lange’s (cross-lagged panel) findings suggest that CFC
may mediate the effect of regulatory style, it is important to
recognize that their operationalization of future and present
orientation is much different than our focus on CFC. In
their study, Zacher and de Lange operationalized “future
orientation” in terms of optimism over future “opportunities” and “present orientation” in terms of pessimism over
future “limitations.” Arguably, Zacher and de Lange operationalize time orientation in more narrow and perhaps transient terms (a perception that one currently has future
opportunities vs. limitations). By contrast, we focus on
broader individual differences in the tendency to consider
the future (vs. immediate) consequences of one’s actions,
which we have argued theoretically give rise to (i.e., better
fit with) promotion and prevention styles, respectively.
Nevertheless, in light of Zacher and de Lange’s findings,
we test the competing model suggesting that CFC mediates
the link between regulatory style and exercise and healthy
eating outcomes.

Overview of Studies
To further evaluate the nature of the CFC construct, and its
links with regulatory focus, exercise, and healthy eating,
we conducted two studies. In Study 1, we performed an
exploratory factor analysis of the new CFC-14 scale and
tested a structural model positioning regulatory focus as a
mediator between the CFC subscales and exercise attitudes and intentions. In Study 2, we used confirmatory
factor analysis on the CFC-14 scale to compare the fit of
a one-factor and a two-factor model, and we tested a structural model positioning regulatory focus as a mediator
between the CFC subscales and healthy eating attitudes
and intentions.

Study 1
Exploratory Factor Analysis of the CFC-14
Scale and Links to Exercise
Method
Participants and procedure. Students enrolled in an introductory marketing class at a large state university participated for course credit. The sample (N = 119, 76% Caucasian)
included 71 males and 48 females, with a median age of 21.
All measures were completed via an online survey administered in a 10-station computer lab.
Measures. As part of a larger survey, participants completed Strathman et al.’s (1994) original CFC-12 scale, along
with two additional (future-oriented) items. All items on the
CFC-14 scale are shown in the appendix. The two new items
were written by the first author and were designed to assess,
as directly as possible, a “concern with future consequences”
proper. Participants responded to each item on a 7-point
scale (1 = very uncharacteristic of me; 7 = very characteristic of me).3 In addition to the CFC-14 scale, participants
completed Lockwood et al.’s (2002) 18-item measure of
regulatory orientation (1 = not at all true of me; 7 = very true
of me). Lockwood et al.’s scale contains two subscales
assessing the strength of a promotion orientation (e.g., I frequently imagine how I will achieve my hopes and aspirations.) and a prevention orientation (e.g., In general, I am
focused on preventing negative events in my life.), respectively. Both scales showed high internal reliability (Cronbach’s
α = .84 and .80).4
To gather evidence for the predictive validity of the CFC
subscales, and mediation via regulatory focus, we also
assessed exercise attitudes and intentions. Exercise attitudes
were assessed with three items: (a) regular physical exercise
is essential to good health, (b) regular physical activity makes
one feel better, and (c) I enjoy physical activity. (Cronbach’s
α = .72). Future exercise intentions were assessed with a single item: “Next week, how many times do you plan to exercise (how many different exercise sessions)?”
Results
Exploratory factor analysis. We submitted the CFC-14 to a
principal components analysis followed by oblimin rotation.
We used an oblimin rotation, as past research has shown that
the CFC-Future and CFC-Immediate subscales are (negatively) correlated (e.g., Joireman et al., 2008). Prior to conducting the analysis, we examined three measures to assess
the suitability of the data for factor analysis (Field, 2009):
The Kaiser–Meyer–Olkin measure (KMO = .85) was acceptably high (in the “very good” range; Field, 2009); the determinant of the correlation matrix was .004 (exceeding the
recommended .00001 value and ruling out multicollinearity); and Bartlett’s test of sphericity was significant, χ2(91) =
614.86, p < .001, revealing that the correlations were acceptably large for Principal Component Analysis (PCA). Turning

Downloaded from psp.sagepub.com at Maastricht University on May 28, 2014

1278		

Personality and Social Psychology Bulletin 38(10)

Figure 1. Scree plot of the CFC-14 Scale (Study 1)
Table 2. Rotated Factor Loadings (Study 1)
Item

CFC-Immediate

CFC-Future

CFC11
CFC4
CFC3
CFC5
CFC10
CFC9
CFC12
CFC13
CFC7
CFC2
CFC1
CFC14
CFC9
CFC6

.81
.80
.79
.74
.64
.62
.47
.00
.11
−.24
−.10
−.16
.10
−.28

−.12
−.03
−.12
.41
−.23
−.16
.01
.79
.70
.67
.66
.63
.57
.48

Note: CFC = Consideration of Future Consequences. N = 117. Loadings
shown are from the pattern matrix following oblimin rotation. All loadings
significant, p < .01, following Stevens (1996, Table 11.1, with sample size
interpolated between N = 100 and N = 140).

to the main analysis, three eigenvalues exceeded 1 (5.02,
2.14, 1.04), suggesting the possibility of three factors. However, the eigenvalue > 1 criterion is known to lead to overextraction of factors (Zwick & Velicer, 1986). In addition, an
examination of the scree plot (Cattell, 1966) clearly suggested the presence of two factors (see Figure 1). The two
factors explained 51.2% of the variance and were negatively
but not strongly correlated (Φ = −.27). The rotated item loadings on the two factors from the pattern matrix are shown in
Table 2. As can be seen, all items loaded on their expected
factor, and only one item showed a cross loading >.30. A reliability analysis further revealed that the seven-item CFCFuture and CFC-Immediate subscales were highly reliable
(respective Cronbach’s αs = .80 and .84). As expected, we
also found that the internal reliability of the original fiveitem CFC-Future subscale was relatively low (α = .70), compared with the seven-item CFC-Future subscale.
Predicting regulatory orientation, exercise attitudes, and intentions. In the introduction, we argued that evidence for a twofactor solution should move beyond factor analysis and

include an examination of the CFC subscales’ ability to differentially predict relevant outcomes. Accordingly, in the
present study, we evaluated whether the CFC-Future and
CFC-Immediate subscales differentially predict regulatory
orientation and exercise attitudes and intentions. We also
explored whether regulatory orientation would mediate the
relationship between the two CFC subscales and the various
exercise outcomes. Table 3 presents the simple correlations
among all relevant variables. To summarize, CFC-Future
showed a strong positive correlation with scores on the promotion scale, as well as exercise attitudes and intentions.
Promotion orientation was positively related to exercise attitudes and intentions. And exercise attitudes were positively
related to exercise intentions. CFC-Immediate correlated
negatively with promotion orientation and was not significantly correlated with the exercise outcomes.5
Complementing these analyses, we next performed a path
analysis to test whether regulatory orientation mediated between
the CFC subscales and exercise attitudes, which in turn would
predict exercise intentions. As shown in Figure 2, the path
model fits the data well.6 Following up on the path analysis, we
conducted focused tests of the indirect effects implied by the
model using the bootstrapping procedure developed by Preacher
and Hayes (2008; see also Zhao, Lynch, & Chen, 2010). A summary of these analyses, shown in Table 4, provided good support
for the proposed indirect links (with respect to CFC-Future).7
Discussion. The present study yielded two important findings.
First, in line with five recent articles (Adams, 2012; Joireman
et al., 2008; Petrocelli, 2003; Rappange et al., 2009; Toepoel,
2010), the present study supported the presence of two
underlying factors on the new CFC-14 scale (CFC-Future
and CFC-Immediate), both of which were highly reliable.
Second, the present study provided initial support for the
hypothesis that the CFC-Future subscale would predict
favorable exercise attitudes and intentions through its relationship with a promotion-oriented regulatory style. Moreover, in partial support of our second hypothesis, scores on
the CFC-Immediate subscale were positively related to a
prevention-oriented style (although, unexpectedly, so were
scores on the CFC-Future subscale). In an effort to replicate
and extend these findings, Study 2 used confirmatory factor
analysis to compare the fit of a one-factor versus a two-factor
model on the CFC-14 scale, and structural equation modeling to test the proposed links between CFC, regulatory focus,
and healthy eating attitudes and intentions.

Study 2
Confirmatory Factor Analysis of the CFC-14
Scale and Links to Healthy Eating
Method
Participants and procedure. Students enrolled in an introductory marketing class at a large state university participated
for course credit. The sample (N = 232, 80% Caucasian)

Downloaded from psp.sagepub.com at Maastricht University on May 28, 2014

1279

Joireman et al.
Table 3. Correlations and Descriptive Statistics (Study 1)

CFC-I
CFC-F
Prevention
Promotion
Attitudes
Exercise Intentions

Alpha

M

SD

CFC-I

CFC-F

Prevention

Promotion

Attitudes

.84
.80
.80
.84
.72
—

3.67
5.15
4.60
5.86
6.34
4.07

1.03
0.80
0.98
0.69
0.71
1.88

−.42**
.16
−.25**
−.14
−.16

.11
.43**
.23*
.29**

.21*
.01
−.04

.35**
.21*

.61**

Note: CFC = Consideration of Future Consequences; CFC-I = CFC-Immediate subscale; CFC-F = CFC-Future subscale. Ns range from 114 to 118.
*p < .05. **p < .01 (two-tailed).

Figure 2. Path model linking CFC subscales with exercise outcomes via regulatory focus orientation (Study 1)

Note: SB = Sattora-Bentler; GFI = Goodness of fit index; CFI = Comparative fit index RMSEA = root mean square error approximation; LL = lower limit;
UL = upper limit; CFC = Consideration of Future Consequences.

Table 4. Summary of Indirect Effects Tests

Indirect effect tested
Study 1 (E)
CFC-F → Promotion → Attitudes
Promotion → Attitudes → E-Intentions
Study 2 (HE)
CFC-F → Promotion → Attitudes
Promotion → Attitudes → HE-Intentions

Path A

Path B

Path C’

Indirect effect

(X → M)

(M → Y.X)

(X → Y.M)

95% confidence interval

B

p

B

p

B

p

Lower

Point

Upper

.35
.35

.001
.001

.32
1.73

.001
.001

.08
−.08

.348
.693

.04
.24

.11
.61

.22 **
.98 ***

.46
.52

.001
.001

.54
.42

.001
.001

−.02
.26

.799
.023

.14
.11

.25
.22

.41 ***
.36 ***

Note: Path A = relationship between independent variable (IV) and mediator; Path B = relationship between mediator and dependent variable (DV),
controlling for IV. Path C’ = direct effect of IV on DV, controlling for mediator. Lower = lower bound of confidence interval; Point = point estimate;
Upper = upper bound of confidence interval. Indirect effect is significant if confidence interval does not include zero. CFC = Consideration of Future
Consequences; E = exercise; HE = healthy eating; CFC-I = CFC-Immediate subscale; CFC-F = CFC-Future subscale. Indirect effects estimated using
Preacher and Hayes (2008) bootstrapping procedure (see also Zhao, Lynch, & Chen, 2010).
**p < .01. ***p < .001.

included 118 males and 114 females, with a median age of
21. As in Study 1, all measures were completed via an online
survey administered in a 10-station computer lab.
Measures. Participants completed the CFC-14 scale and the
Lockwood et al. (2002) regulatory focus measure described in

Study 1 (αs: CFC-Future = .82, CFC-Immediate = .84, Promotion = .86, Prevention = .80). In addition, to gather evidence
for the predictive validity of the CFC subscales, and mediation
via regulatory focus, we assessed healthy eating attitudes and
intentions. Healthy eating attitudes were assessed with three

Downloaded from psp.sagepub.com at Maastricht University on May 28, 2014

1280		

Personality and Social Psychology Bulletin 38(10)

Table 5. Correlations and Descriptive Statistics (Study 2)

CFC-I
CFC-F
Prevention
Promotion
Attitudes
Healthy Eating

Alpha

M

SD

CFC-I

CFC-F

Prevention

Promotion

Attitudes

.84
.82
.80
.86
.72
—

3.74
5.12
4.52
5.97
5.89
8.38

1.07
.90
1.05
.75
1.01
1.24

−.29**
.27**
−.16*
−.05
−.02

.18*
.52**
.18*
.14*

.20**
.05
−.02

.39**
.28**

.41**

Note: CFC-I = CFC-Immediate subscale; CFC-F = CFC-Future subscale; Healthy Eating = Healthy eating intentions (averaged over breakfast, lunch, dinner).
Ns range from 221 to 228.
*p < .05. **p < .01 (two-tailed).

items: (a) Eating healthy is essential to my well-being, (b) I
enjoy eating healthy, and (c) I feel great personal satisfaction
when I eat healthy (α = .81). Healthy eating intentions were
assessed by asking participants to think about future breakfasts, lunches, and dinners and to rate how healthy those meals
would be (1 = not healthy; 10 = very healthy; α = .81).
Results
Confirmatory factor analysis. To test the validity of the twofactor (vs. one-factor) models, we conducted confirmatory
factor analysis. We began by evaluating the fit of the hypothesized two-factor model. The initial two-factor model showed
a reasonable fit to the data, Sattora-Bentler (SB) χ2(76) =
164.85, p < .001, Goodness of Fit Index (GFI) = .890, Comparative Fit Index (CFI) = .892, root mean square error
approximation (RMSEA) = .072 (lower limit [LL] = .057,
upper limit [UL] = .087). However, to achieve acceptable fit
(GFI and CFI near .95, and RMSEA below .05; Hu & Bentler,
1999), it was necessary to estimate seven correlated error
terms. The final model, shown in Figure 3, fit the data well,
SBχ2(69) = 97.69, p = .013, GFI = .943, CFI = .965, RMSEA =
.043 (LL = .020, UL = .062). As can be seen, the correlation
between the factors was not especially large (Φ = −.37), and
the majority of the correlated errors were understandable,
given the common wording on the correlated items (e.g.,
Items 2 and 6 contain the phrase “achieve future outcomes”;
Items 3 and 4 mention “immediate concerns”; Items 6 and 10
mention “sacrificing”; and Items 7 and 9 mention “warnings”). Next, we estimated a one-factor model, including all
of the correlated error terms shown in Figure 2, to make the
model comparison a fair test of the differences between the
models (i.e., the only difference between the models is the
number of underlying factors hypothesized). The one-factor
model, with the same correlated errors as shown in our final
model, fit the data very poorly, SBχ2(70) = 329.90, p <
.001, GFI = .734, CFI = .685, RMSEA = .129 (LL = .115,
UL = .143). Furthermore, a direct comparison of the two
models showed that the two-factor model fit the data significantly better than the one-factor model, SBχ2Δ(1) =
38.97, p < .001. In addition, if the correlation between the
two factors is set to 1 (Benson & Hocevar, 1985), model fit

is poor, SBχ2(70) = 222.10, p < .001, GFI = .896, CFI =
.816, RMSEA = .099 (LL = .084, UL = .113), and is significantly worse than when the correlation between the
factors is freely estimated, SBχ2Δ(1) = 38.97, p < .001. As
noted earlier, and replicating Study 1, reliability analysis
indicated that both of the CFC subscales showed impressive internal reliabilities (CFC-Future = .82; CFC-Immediate = .80). As before, the reliability of the original
five-item CFC-Future subscale was acceptable but was
again lower (α = .74) than the reliability of the seven-item
CFC-Future subscale.
Predicting regulatory orientation, healthy eating attitudes,
and intentions. As in Study 1, we collected additional data to
evaluate whether the two CFC subscales would differentially predict regulatory orientation and healthy eating attitudes and intentions. We also examined whether regulatory
orientation would mediate the relations between the two
CFC subscales and the healthy eating outcomes.
Table 5 presents the simple correlations among all relevant variables. To summarize, CFC-Future again showed a
strong positive correlation with scores on the promotion
scale, and moderate (but significant) positive relationships
with healthy eating attitudes and future intentions. Promotion
orientation was positively related to healthy eating attitudes
as well as healthy eating intentions. Finally, healthy eating
attitudes were positively correlated with healthy eating
intentions. CFC-Immediate, by comparison, correlated negatively with promotion orientation, positively with prevention
orientation, and was not significantly correlated with the
healthy eating outcomes.
Complementing these analyses, we next performed a path
analysis to test whether regulatory orientation mediated
between the CFC subscales and healthy eating attitudes,
which in turn would predict healthy eating intentions. The
path model testing this sequence (Figure 4) fit the data well.8
Following up on the path analysis, we conducted focused
tests of the indirect effects implied by the model using the
bootstrapping procedure developed by Preacher and Hayes
(2008; see also Zhao et al., 2010). A summary of these analyses provided strong support for the three mediation paths
implied by the model (Table 4).

Downloaded from psp.sagepub.com at Maastricht University on May 28, 2014

1281

Joireman et al.

Figure 3. Confirmatory factor analysis of the CFC-14 Scale (Study 2)

Note: SB = Sattora-Bentler; GFI = Goodness of fit index; CFI = Comparative fit index RMSEA = root mean square error approximation; LL = lower limit;
UL = upper limit; CFC = Consideration of Future Consequences. All loadings significant, p < .001. All covariances significant, p < .02.

Discussion. Using confirmatory factor analysis, the present
study provided additional support for the presence of two
CFC subfactors on the revised CFC-14 scale, both of which
were highly reliable. The present study also conceptually
replicated our earlier findings by showing that a promotion
orientation mediated the relationship between CFC-Future
and healthy eating attitudes and intentions. Finally, consistent with our earlier findings, CFC-Future and CFC-Immediate were both equally (and positively) related to scores on
the prevention orientation scale.

General Discussion
Over the past several decades, obesity has risen dramatically
in the United States. Currently, it is estimated that roughly
two thirds of Americans are overweight (with a BMI ≥ 25)
and one third of Americans are obese (with a BMI ≥ 30;
Flegal, Carroll, Ogden, & Curtin, 2010). Two of the most
important steps people can take to curb obesity include
engaging in regular exercise and eating a healthy diet.
Unfortunately, because the alternatives (physical inactivity

Downloaded from psp.sagepub.com at Maastricht University on May 28, 2014

1282		

Personality and Social Psychology Bulletin 38(10)

Figure 4. Path model linking CFC subscales with healthy eating outcomes via regulatory focus orientation (Study 2)

Note: SB = Sattora-Bentler; GFI = Goodness of fit index; CFI = Comparative fit index RMSEA = root mean square error approximation; LL = lower limit;
UL = upper limit; CFC = Consideration of Future Consequences.

and a poor diet) offer more immediate benefits, many people
fail to exercise and eat healthy foods. Given the intertemporal nature of such health behavior decisions, one factor that
influences whether an individual exercises and follows a
healthy diet is their CFC (Strathman et al., 1994). The present studies helped shed light on how CFC relates to exercise
and healthy eating in two ways. First, consistent with five
recent studies (Adams, 2012; Joireman et al., 2008; Petrocelli,
2003; Rappange et al., 2009; Toepoel, 2010), we provided
evidence that responses to the new CFC-14 scale are best
captured by two underlying factors: a seven-item CFCFuture subscale and a seven-item CFC-Immediate subscale.
Second, we showed that a promotion orientation (Higgins
et al., 2001; Lockwood et al., 2002) mediates the relationship between CFC-Future, on one hand, and exercise and
healthy eating attitudes and intentions on the other hand. As
detailed below, these results help extend work on CFC and
health behavior by further supporting the discriminant validity
of the two subscales, enhancing reliability of the CFC-Future
subscale, and identifying a mediator between CFC-Future and
two behaviors important in promoting healthy lifestyles and
reducing obesity (exercise and healthy eating).

Extensions of the CFC-Health Behavior Literature
In 1994, Strathman and colleagues introduced the 12-item
CFC scale to help researchers assess the extent to which
people are concerned with and impacted by the future (vs.
immediate) consequences of their behavior. Since that time,
researchers have demonstrated that scores on the CFC scale
predict a wide range of thoughts, feelings, and behaviors
related to intertemporal decisions (for a broader review, see
Joireman, Strathman, & Balliet, 2006). As summarized in
our introduction, one important and highly productive line

of CFC research has been in the area of health behavior.
Although yielding important insights, most of this work has
treated the CFC construct as a unidimensional construct, and
few studies have attempted to understand why CFC predicts
health-related outcomes. The present studies aimed to
address these gaps in the literature.
As noted, our results provide additional support for the
presence of two underlying CFC factors (CFC-Future and
CFC-Immediate). This distinction is important because separating the two subscales adds clarity to CFC’s relationship
with a given outcome. If researchers continue to reverse code
the immediate items and then average over the entire set of
CFC items, they will end up with a single CFC score, which
may predict behavior, but whose interpretation is unclear. A
positive correlation between CFC and a given outcome of
interest (say exercise) can mean the following:
1. that those who are concerned with the future consequences of their behavior (proper) are more likely
to exercise,
2. that those who are concerned with the immediate
consequences of their behavior are less likely to
exercise, or
3. both.
By clearly separating the future from the immediate items, a
researcher can clearly tease apart these different explanations.
Although the use of two CFC subscales will introduce some
complexity to the analysis (and theorizing), we believe (based
on our own findings and previous research; Joireman et al.,
2008, 2010; Rappange et al., 2009) that the additional steps will
be worth the effort, primarily because the distinction will help
shed a more nuanced light on the relationship between CFC and
a researcher’s given outcome of interest.

Downloaded from psp.sagepub.com at Maastricht University on May 28, 2014

1283

Joireman et al.
In particular, distinguishing between CFC-Future and
CFC-Immediate allows a researcher to test the buffering and
susceptibility hypotheses advanced by Joireman et al. (2008).
These hypotheses hold important practical implications
within the health domain. If CFC-Future is the primary predictor of a given health behavior, the buffering hypothesis is
supported, and interventions should focus on encouraging
people to value and become aware of the future consequences
of their actions. On the other hand, if CFC-Immediate is the
primary predictor, the susceptibility hypothesis is supported
and interventions should focus on reducing a concern with
the immediate consequences of an action or eliminating them
altogether. Put in broader theoretical terms, the buffering
hypothesis assumes that activation of a “cool,” conscious,
and rational system will promote health behaviors, whereas
the susceptibility hypothesis assumes that reducing the
salience of “hot” triggers will lower the likelihood of
unhealthy behaviors directed by unconscious impulses for
immediate gratification (Metcalfe & Mischel, 1999).
In addition to shedding light on the underlying nature of the
CFC construct, the present studies provided additional insight
into why individual differences in CFC relate to health behavior. Specifically, we found that people scoring high on the
CFC-Future subscale are more likely to exercise and eat healthfully because they adopt a promotion-oriented regulatory style.
Based on theoretical arguments and empirical data offered in
the introduction, we anticipated this. However, as we noted, it
was equally plausible, based on some other studies that CFCFuture would be more closely linked with a prevention-oriented style. One possible reason for the difference in our results
is that the current study directly correlated CFC with individual
differences in regulatory focus, whereas the previously noted
studies inferred that those scoring high in CFC adopt a prevention orientation based on their response and attention to persuasive messages. Clearly, future research is needed to better
understand the link between CFC, regulatory focus, and health
behaviors. Nevertheless, the current studies do seem to converge on the conclusion that, at the level of individual differences, those scoring high on the CFC-Future subscale adopt a
promotion-oriented regulatory style. That said, results across
both studies showed a secondary, small but significant positive
relationship between CFC-Future and prevention orientation,
suggesting that those scoring high on CFC-Future primarily
aim to promote positive outcomes but are also attuned to preventing negative outcomes. However, in the present studies,
prevention orientation was not related to the outcomes of
interest, suggesting that the key path from CFC-Future to
health outcomes runs through a promotion orientation.

Limitations and Future Directions
Before closing, we consider some limitations of the present studies and suggest several directions for future

research. First, the current data are based on single
administration, correlational data. As such, future
research would benefit by looking at how CFC, regulatory focus, and health behavior relate over time. Second,
the current data are based on self-reports. Future research
incorporating actual behavioral measures would
strengthen confidence in our findings. Third, although
demonstrating a meaningful link between individual differences in CFC and regulatory focus, our data do not
address the underlying mechanism that might link the
two constructs. One possibility is that CFC predicts temporal discounting, delay of gratification, and/or temporal
construals (e.g., Daly, Delaney, & Harmon, 2009;
Joireman et al., 2006; Joireman et al., 2008), which in
turn encourage the adoption of a promotion orientation.
Finally, the current studies focused on two specific
health behaviors. Given that CFC predicts a much wider
range of outcomes, including academic performance
(e.g., Joireman, 1999), financial decision making (e.g.,
Howlett, Kees, & Kemp, 2008), and environmental
behavior (e.g., Ebreo & Vining, 2001; Kortenkamp &
Moore, 2006), future research could examine whether
regulatory focus explains the link between CFC and
these other important outcomes.

Conclusion
Recently, the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention
(CDC; 2011) advanced the “Healthy People 2020” initiative to support America’s efforts in becoming a “society
in which all people live long, healthy lives.” Specifically,
the CDC outlined a 10-year plan to improve the health of
all Americans by providing science-based insights to
help people make informed health decisions and monitor
their health behaviors. To achieve such ambitious goals,
it is important to understand the underlying mechanisms
that influence health behaviors such as exercise and
healthy eating. The present studies contributed to that
effort by studying the relationship between CFC, regulatory focus, and health behaviors related to a host of important outcomes (e.g., weight control, diabetes, cardiovascular
health). Across two studies, we found that individuals concerned with the future consequences of their actions (i.e.,
those scoring high on the CFC-Future subscale) had more
favorable attitudes toward, and stronger intentions to engage
in health-related behaviors (exercise and healthy eating)
because they adopt a promotion orientation. We also found
that concern with immediate consequences (i.e., the CFCImmediate subscale) and prevention orientation were not
related to exercise and healthy eating outcomes. These findings suggest that efforts to reach the CDC’s goals focus on
promoting positive future benefits of exercise and healthy
eating.

Downloaded from psp.sagepub.com at Maastricht University on May 28, 2014

1284		

Personality and Social Psychology Bulletin 38(10)

Appendix
CFC-14 Scale
1.
2.
3.
4.
5.
6.
7.
8.
9.
10.
11.
12.
13.
14.

I consider how things might be in the future, and try to
influence those things with my day to day behavior. (F)
Often I engage in a particular behavior in order to achieve
outcomes that may not result for many years. (F)
I only act to satisfy immediate concerns, figuring the future
will take care of itself. (I)
My behavior is only influenced by the immediate (i.e., a
matter of days or weeks) outcomes of my actions. (I)
My convenience is a big factor in the decisions I make or
the actions I take.(I)
I am willing to sacrifice my immediate happiness or wellbeing in order to achieve future outcomes. (F)
I think it is important to take warnings about negative
outcomes seriously even if the negative outcome will
not occur for many years. (F)
I think it is more important to perform a behavior with
important distant consequences than a behavior with
less important immediate consequences. (F)
I generally ignore warnings about possible future problems
because I think the problems will be resolved before
they reach crisis level. (I)
I think that sacrificing now is usually unnecessary since
future outcomes can be dealt with at a later time. (I)
I only act to satisfy immediate concerns, figuring that I will
take care of future problems that may occur at a later
date. (I)
Since my day-to-day work has specific outcomes, it is
more important to me than behavior that has distant
outcomes. (I)
When I make a decision, I think about how it might affect
me in the future. (F)
My behavior is generally influenced by future
consequences. (F)

Note: F = CFC-Future subscale item; I = CFC-Immediate subscale item.
Strathman et al.’s original CFC scale = Items 1-12. CFC-14 Scale Instructions: “For each of the statements shown, please indicate whether or not
the statement is characteristic of you. If the statement is extremely uncharacteristic of you (not at all like you) please write a “1” in the space provided
to the right of the statement; if the statement is extremely characteristic of
you (very much like you) please write a “7” in the space provided. And, of
course, use the numbers in the middle if you fall between the extremes.”

Declaration of Conflicting Interests
The author(s) declared no potential conflicts of interest with
respect to the research, authorship, and/or publication of this
article.

Funding
The author(s) received no financial support for the research,
authorship, and/or publication of this article.

Notes
1. Although a formal meta-analysis is beyond the scope of the current article, it is worth noting that, across the studies reported

here, consideration of future consequences (CFC) explains
between 1% and 33% of the variance in the relevant health
outcome, with the majority of r2 values falling below 12%.
2. Other studies have treated CFC as a mediator. For example,
Adams and White (2009) showed that CFC partially mediated
the relationship between economic deprivation and body mass
index, whereas Crockett, Weinman, Hankins, and Marteau
(2009) showed that CFC partially mediated the relationship
between socioeconomic status and intention to engage in diabetes screening. Although interesting, we do not discuss this work
in detail, as it positions CFC as a mediator of broader socioeconomic factors, and our focus is on what mediates CFC’s relationship with exercise and healthy eating.
3. Originally, Strathman, Gleicher, Boninger, and Edwards (1994)
used a 5-point scale. However, to increase variability, Joireman,
Strathman, and Balliet (2006) recommended the use of the
7-point scale employed here.
4. We selected Lockwood, Jordan, and Kunda’s (2002) measure
because it was widely used in the literature, and its items possess strong face validity. Nevertheless, there has been debate
about the relative merits of Lockwood et al.’s measure and
Higgins et al.’s (2001) regulatory focus questionnaire. Notably,
Summerville and Roese (2008) argued that the two measures
are independent and can be conceptualized differently: Higgins
et al.’s measure corresponds to a self-guide definition (ideal vs.
ought selves), whereas Lockwood et al.’s measure corresponds
to a reference-point definition (pursuing gains vs. avoiding
loses). Summerville and Roese also cautioned that Lockwood
et al.’s measure is potentially confounded with approach/
avoidance orientation and positive/negative affect. In their
response to this cautionary note, Righetti, Finkenauer, and
Rusbult (2011) noted that their previous work (Righetti,
Rusbult, & Finkenauer, 2010) showed that approach/avoidance
tendencies did not explain the effect of promotion/prevention
orientation, and that, in theory, even if promotion/prevention
overlaps with approach/avoidance and/or positive/negative
affect, this is not highly problematic, as approach/avoidance
and positive/negative affect represent “inherent properties of
[the promotion/prevention] constructs” (p. 723). Given this, use
of the Lockwood et al. measure in the present study does not
appear problematic. At the same time, it would be valuable to
explore in future research the extent to which our findings generalize using the Higgins et al. measure.
5. Several items on the promotion and prevention scales mention
academic achievement, which has previously been linked with
CFC (Joireman, 1999). To determine whether the relationships
reported in the current article were attributable to this “context
specific content,” we computed reduced (seven item) promotion and prevention scales without the academic-related items
included (two items were dropped on each scale) and correlated the reduced scales with the remaining model variables. In
both studies, the correlation between the full and reduced
scales was r = .96 for both promotion and prevention.
Moreover, the full and reduced scales showed very similar correlations with the other model variables, suggesting that the

Downloaded from psp.sagepub.com at Maastricht University on May 28, 2014

1285

Joireman et al.
academically oriented items on the promotion and prevention
scales did not systematically bias the relationships reported in
our studies.
6. We also tested a competing path model in which regulatory
focus and CFC were reversed (i.e., treating CFC as the mediator
between regulatory focus and exercise attitudes). This model,
however, did not fit the data as well as the model shown in
Figure 2: SBχ2(6) = 21.36, p < .001, GFI = .950, CFI = .898, root
mean square error approximation (RMSEA) = .134, lower limit
(LL) = .066, upper limit (UL) = .210.
7. In both studies, indirect effects were only conducted when the
proposed mediator was a significant predictor of the proposed
outcome variable (i.e., an indirect effect of CFC subscales
through prevention orientation was not conducted in either
study, as prevention orientation was not a significant predictor
of exercise or healthy eating attitudes).
8. Consistent with Study 1, the competing path model, in which
regulatory focus and CFC were reversed, did not fit the data as
well as the model shown in Figure 4: SBχ2(6) = 31.43, p < .001,
GFI = .953, CFI = .852, RMSEA = .148, LL = .101, UL = .199.

References
Adams, J. (2012). Consideration of immediate and future consequences, smoking status, and body mass index. Health Psychology, 31, 260-263. doi:10.1037/a0025790
Adams, J., & Nettle, D. (2009). Time perspective, personality
and smoking, body mass, and physical activity: An empirical study. British Journal of Health Psychology, 14, 83-105.
doi:10.1348/135910708X299664
Adams, J., & White, M. (2009). Time perspective in socioeconomic
inequalities in smoking and body mass index. Health Psychology, 28, 83-90. doi:10.1037/0278-6133.28.1.83
Appleby, P. R., Marks, G., Ayala, A., Miller, L. C., Murphy, S., &
Mansergh, G. (2005). Consideration of future consequences and
anal intercourse among men who have sex with men. Journal of
Homosexuality, 50, 119-133. doi:10.1300/J082v50n01_06
Baumeister, R. F., Muraven, M., & Tice, D. M. (2000). Ego depletion: A resource model of volition, self-regulation, and controlled
processing. Social Cognition, 18, 130-150. doi:10.1521/soco
.2000.18.2.130
Benson, J., & Hocevar, D. (1985). The impact of item phrasing
on the validity of attitudes scales for elementary school children. Journal of Educational Measurement, 22, 231-240.
doi:10.1111/j.1745-3984.1985.tb01061.x
Cattell, R. B. (1966). The scree test for the number of factors.
Multivariate Behavioral Research, 1, 245-276. doi:10.1207/
s15327906mbr0102_10
Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. (2011). Healthy people.
Retrieved from http://www.cdc.gov/nchs/healthy_people.htm
Cesario, J., Grant, H., & Higgins, E. T. (2004). Regulatory fit and
persuasion: Transfer from feeling right. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 86, 388-404. doi:10.1037/00223514.86.3.388
Crockett, R. A., Weinman, J., Hankins, M., & Marteau, T. (2009).
Time orientation and health-related behavior: Measurement

in general population samples. Psychology and Health, 24,
333-350. doi:10.1080/08870440701813030
Daly, M., Delaney, L., & Harmon, C. P. (2009). Psychological
and biological foundations of time preference. Journal of the
European Economic Association, 7, 659-669. doi:10.1162/
JEEA.2009.7.2-3.659
Daugherty, J. R., & Brase, G. L. (2010). Taking time to be healthy:
Predicting health behaviors with delay discounting and time
perspective. Personality and Individual Differences, 48, 202207. doi:10.1016/j.paid.2009.10.007
Dorr, N., Krueckeberg, S., Strathman, A., & Wood, M. D. (1999).
Psychosocial correlates of voluntary HIV antibody testing in
college students. AIDS Education and Prevention, 11, 14-27.
Ebreo, A., & Vining, J. (2001). How similar are recycling and waste
reduction? Future orientation and reasons for reducing waste as
predictors of self-reported behavior. Environment and Behavior, 33, 424-448. doi:10.1177/00139160121973061
Fessel, F. (2011). Increasing level of aspiration by matching construal level and temporal distance. Social Psychological and Personality Science, 2, 103-111. doi:10.1177/1948550610381788
Field, A. (2009). Discovering statistics using SPSS (3rd ed.). Thousand Oaks, CA: SAGE.
Flegal, K. M., Carroll, M. D., Ogden, C. L., & Curtin, L. R. (2010).
Prevalence and trends in obesity among U.S. adults, 19992008. Journal of the American Medical Association, 303,
235-241. doi:10.1001/jama.2009.2014
Gilovich, T., Kerr, M., & Medvec, V. H. (1993). Effect of temporal perspective on subjective confidence. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 64, 552-560. doi:10.1037/
0022-3514.64.4.552
Hazlett, A., Molden, D. C., & Sackett, A. M. (2011). Hoping for
the best or preparing for the worst? Regulatory focus and preferences for optimism and pessimism in predicting personal
outcomes. Social Cognition, 29, 74-96. doi:10.1521/soco
.2011.29.1.74
Heckman, C. J., Wilson, D. B., & Ingersoll, K. S. (2009). The influence of appearance, health, and future orientations on tanning
behavior. American Journal of Health Behavior, 33, 238-243.
doi:10.5993/AJHB.33.3.2
Hevey, D., Perti, M., Thomas, K., Maher, L., Craig, A., &
Chuinneagain, S. N. (2010). Consideration of future consequences
scale: Confirmatory factor analysis. Personality and Individual
Differences, 48, 654-657. doi:10.1016/j.paid.2010.01.006
Higgins, E. T. (1997). Beyond pleasure and pain. American Psychologist, 52, 1280-1300. doi:10.1037/0003-066X.52.12.1280
Higgins, E. T., Friedman, R. S., Harlow, R. E., Idson, L. C.,Ayduk, O. N.,
& Taylor, A. (2001). Achievement orientations from subjective histories of success: Promotion pride versus prevention pride. European Journal of Social Psychology, 31, 3-23. doi:10.1002/ejsp.27
Howlett, E., Kees, J., & Kemp, E. (2008). The role of self-regulation,
future orientation, and financial knowledge in long-term financial decisions. Journal of Consumer Affairs, 42, 223-424.
doi:10.1111/j.1745-6606.2008.00106.x
Hu, L.-T., & Bentler, P. M. (1999). Cutoff criteria for fit indices in
covariance structure analysis: Conventional criteria versus new

Downloaded from psp.sagepub.com at Maastricht University on May 28, 2014

1286		

Personality and Social Psychology Bulletin 38(10)

alternatives. Structural Equation Modeling, 6, 1-55. doi:10.1080/
10705519909540118
Joireman, J. A. (1999). Additional evidence for validity of the
consideration of future consequences scale in an academic
setting. Psychological Reports, 84, 1171-1172. doi:10.2466/
pr0.1999.84.3c.1171
Joireman, J. A., Anderson, J., & Strathman, A. (2003). The aggression paradox: Understanding links among aggression, sensation seeking, and the consideration of future consequences.
Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 84, 1287-1302.
doi:10.1037/0022-3514.84.6.1287
Joireman, J., & Balliet, D. (2012). Preference for certain but smaller
vs. less certain but larger outcomes as a function of individual
differences in the consideration of future consequences. Unpublished data.
Joireman, J., Balliet, D., Sprott, D., Spangenberg, E., & Schultz, J.
(2008). Consideration of future consequences, ego-depletion,
and self-control: Support for distinguishing between CFCImmediate and CFC-Future sub-scales. Personality and Individual Differences, 45, 15-21. doi:10.1016/j.paid.2008.02.011
Joireman, J., Kees, J., & Sprott, D. (2010). Concern with immediate
consequences magnifies the impact of compulsive buying tendencies on college students’ credit card debt. Journal of Consumer
Affairs, 44, 155-178. doi:10.1111/j.1745-6606.2010.01161.x
Joireman, J., Strathman, A., & Balliet, D. (2006). Considering
future consequences: An integrative model. In L. Sanna & E.
Chang (Eds.), Judgments over time: The interplay of thoughts,
feelings, and behaviors (pp. 82-99). Oxford, UK: Oxford University Press.
Kees, J., Burton, S., & Tangari, A. H. (2010). The impact of regulatory focus, temporal orientation, and fit on consumer responses
to health-related advertising. Journal of Advertising, 39, 19-34.
doi:10.2753/JOA0091-3367390102
Kortenkamp, K. V., & Moore, C. F. (2006). Time, uncertainty, and
individual differences in decisions to cooperate in resource
dilemmas. Personality and Social Psychology Bulletin, 32,
603-615. doi:10.1177/0146167205284006
Kovač, V. B., & Rise, J. (2007). The relation between past behavior, intention, planning, and quitting smoking: The moderating
effect of future orientation. Journal of Applied Biobehavioral
Research, 12, 82-100. doi:10.1111/j.1751-9861.2007.00015.x
Lang, F. R., & Carstensen, L. I. (2002). Time counts: Time perspective, goals, and social relationships. Psychology and Aging, 17,
125-139. doi:10.1037/0882-7974.17.1.125
Lockwood, P., Jordan, C. H., & Kunda, Z. (2002). Motivation by
positive or negative role models: Regulatory focus determines
who will best inspire us. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 83, 854-864. doi:10.1037/0022-3514.83.4.854
Marsh, H. W. (1996). Positive and negative global self-esteem: A
substantively meaningful distinction or artifactors? Journal of
Personality and Social Psychology, 70, 810-819. doi:10.1037/
0022-3514.70.4.810
Metcalfe, J., & Mischel, W. (1999). A hot/cool-system analysis of
delay of gratification: Dynamics of willpower. Psychological
Review, 106, 3-19. doi:10.1037/0033-295X.106.1.3

Mogilner, C., Aaker, J. L., & Pennington, G. L. (2008). Time will
tell: The distant appeal of promotion and imminent appeal
of prevention. Journal of Consumer Research, 34, 670-681.
doi:10.1086/521901
Morison, L. A., Cozzolino, P. J., & Orbell, S. (2010). Temporal perspective and parental intention to accept the human papillomavirus vaccination for their daughter. British Journal of Health
Psychology, 15, 151-165. doi:10.1348/135910709X437092
O’Brien-McElwee, R., & Brittain, L. (2009). Optimism for the
world’s future versus the personal future: Application to environmental attitudes. Current Psychology, 28, 133-145. doi:10.1007/
s12144-009-9051-4
O’Connor, D. B., Warttig, S., Conner, M., & Lawton, R. (2009).
Raising awareness of hypertension risk through a web-based
framing intervention: Does consideration of future consequences make a difference? Psychology, Health, and Medicine,
14, 213-219. doi:10.1080/13548500802291618
Orbell, S., & Hagger, M. (2006). Temporal framing and the decision to take part in type 2 diabetes screening: Effects of individual differences in consideration of future consequences. Health
Psychology, 25, 537-548. doi:10.1037/0278-6133.25.4.537
Orbell, S., & Kyriakaki, M. (2008). Temporal framing and persuasion to adopt preventive health behavior: Moderating effects
of individual differences in consideration of future consequences on sunscreen use. Health Psychology, 27, 770-779.
doi:10.1037/0278-6133.27.6.770
Orbell, S., Perugini, M., & Rakow, T. (2004). Individual differences in sensitivity to health communications: Consideration
of future consequences. Health Psychology, 23, 388-396.
doi:10.1037/0278-6133.23.4.388
Ouellette, J. A., Hessling, R., Gibbons, F. X., Reis-Bergan, M.,
& Gerrard, M. (2005). Using images to increase exercise
behavior: Prototypes versus possible selves. Personality
and Social Psychology Bulletin, 31, 610-620. doi:10.1177/
0146167204271589
Pennington, G. L., & Roese, N. J. (2003). Regulatory focus and
temporal distance. Journal of Experimental Social Psychology,
39, 563-576. doi:10.1016/S0022-1031(03)00058-1
Petrocelli, J. V. (2003). Factor validation of the consideration of
future consequences scale: Evidence for a short version.
Journal of Social Psychology, 143, 405-413. doi:10.1080/
00224540309598453
Piko, B. F., & Brassai, L. (2009). The role of individual and familial
protective factors in adolescents’ diet control. Journal of Health
Psychology, 14, 810-819. doi:10.1177/1359105309338971
Preacher, K. J., & Hayes, A. F. (2008). Asymptotic and resampling
strategies for assessing and comparing indirect effects in multiple mediator models. Behavior Research Methods, 40, 879-891.
doi:10.3758/BRM.40.3.879
Rappange, D. R., Brouwer, W. B. F., & Van Exel, N. J. A. (2009).
Back to the consideration of the future consequences scale:
Time to reconsider? Journal of Social Psychology, 149, 562584. doi:10.1080/00224540903232324
Righetti, F., Finkenauer, C., & Rusbult, C. (2011). The benefits
of interpersonal regulatory fit for individual goal pursuit.

Downloaded from psp.sagepub.com at Maastricht University on May 28, 2014

1287

Joireman et al.
Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 101, 720-736.
doi:10.1037/a0023592
Righetti, F., Rusbult, C. E., & Finkenauer, C. (2010). Regulatory
focus and the Michelangelo phenomenon: How close partners
promote one another’s ideal selves. Journal of Experimental
Social Psychology, 46, 972-985. doi:10.1016/j.jesp.2010.06.001
Shipp, A. J., Edwards, J. R., & Lambert, L. S. (2009). Conceptualization
and measurement of temporal focus: The subjective experience of
the past, present, and future. Organizational Behavior and Human
Decision Processes, 110, 1-22. doi:10.1016/j.obhdp.2009.05.001
Sirois, F. M. (2004). Procrastination and intentions to perform
health behaviors: The role of self-efficacy and the consideration
of future consequences. Personality and Individual Differences,
37, 115-128. doi:10.1016/j.paid.2003.08.005
Snyder, C. R., Rand, K. L., & Ritschel, L. A. (2006). Hope over
time. In L. Sanna & E. Chang (Eds.), Judgments over time: The
interplay of thoughts, feelings, and behaviors (pp. 100-119).
Oxford, UK: Oxford University Press.
Sohl, S. J., & Moyer, A. (2009). Refining the conceptualization of a
future-oriented self-regulatory behavior: Proactive coping. Personality and Individual Differences, 47, 139-144. doi:10.1016/j.
paid.2009.02.013
Strathman, A., Gleicher, F., Boninger, D. S., & Edwards, C. S.
(1994). The consideration of future consequences: Weighing
immediate and distant outcomes of behavior. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 66, 742-752. doi:10.1037/00223514.66.4.742
Summerville, A., & Roese, N. J. (2008). Self-report measures of
individual differences in regulatory focus: A cautionary note.

Journal of Research in Personality, 42, 247-254. doi:10.1016/
j.jrp.2007.05.005
Toepoel, V. (2010). Is consideration of future consequences a
changeable construct? Personality and Individual Differences,
48, 951-956. doi:10.1016/j.paid.2010.02.029
Trope, Y., & Liberman, N. (2003). Temporal construal. Psychological Review, 110, 403-421. doi:10.1037/0033-295X.110.3.403
Vogel, I., Brug, J., Van der Ploeg, C. P. B., & Raat, H. (2010).
Discotheques and the risk of hearing loss among youth: Risky
listening behavior and its psychological correlates. Health Education Research, 25, 737-747. doi:10.1093/her/cyq018
Zacher, H., & de Lange, A. H. (2011). Relations between chronic
regulatory focus and future time perspective: Results of a crosslagged structural equation model. Personality and Individual
Differences, 50, 1255-1260. doi:10.1016/j.paid.2011.02.020
Zhao, G., & Pechmann, C. (2007). The impact of regulatory focus
on adolescents’ response to antismoking advertising campaigns.
Journal of Marketing Research, 44, 671-689. doi:10.1509/
jmkr.44.4.671
Zhao, X., Lynch, J. G., & Chen, O. (2010). Reconsidering Baron
and Kenny: Myths and truths about mediation analysis. Journal
of Consumer Research, 37, 197-206. doi:10.1086/651257
Zimbardo, P. G., & Boyd, J. N. (1999). Putting time in perspective: A
valid, reliable individual differences metric. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 77, 1271-1288. doi:10.1037/00223514.77.6.1271
Zwick, W. R., & Velicer, W. F. (1986). Comparison of five rules for
determining the number of components to retain. Psychological
Bulletin, 99, 432-442. doi:10.1037/0033-2909.99.3.432

Downloaded from psp.sagepub.com at Maastricht University on May 28, 2014

