Journal ol Personality and Social Psychology
1966, Vol. 3, No. 5, 551-558

DEVELOPMENT AND VALIDATION OF EGOIDENTITY STATUSl
JAMES E. MARCIA
State University of New York at Buffalo
4 modes of reacting to the late adolescent identity crisis were described, measured, and validated. Criteria for inclusion in 1 of 4 identity statuses were the
presence of crisis and commitment in the areas of occupation and ideology.
Statuses were determined for 86 college male Ss by means of individual interviews. Performance on a stressful concept-attainment task, patterns of goal
setting, authoritarianism, and vulnerability to self-esteem change were dependent variables. Ss higher in ego identity performed best on the conceptattainment task; those in the status characterized by adherence to parental
wishes set goals unrealistically high and subscribed significantly more to authoritarian values. Failure of the self-esteem condition to discriminate among
the statuses was attributed to unreliability in self-esteem measurement.

Ego identity and identity diffusion (Erikson, 19S6, 1963) refer to polar outcomes of
the hypothesized psychosocial crisis occurring
in late adolescence. Erikson views this phase
of the life cycle as a time of growing occupational and ideological commitment. Facing
such imminent adult tasks as getting a job
and becoming a citizen, the individual is
required to synthesize childhood identifications in such a way that he can both establish
a reciprocal relationship with his society
and maintain a feeling of continuity within
himself.
Previous studies have attempted to determine the extent of ego-identity achievement
by means of an adjustment measure and
the semantic differential technique (Bronson,
19S9), a Q-sort measure of real-ideal-self discrepancy (Gruen, 1960), a measure of role
variability based on adjective ranking (Block,
1961), and a questionnaire (Rasmussen,
1
This paper is based in part on a doctoral dissertation submitted to the Ohio State University
(Marcia, 1964).
The author is indebted to D. P. Crowne, director
of the dissertation, and to G. A. Kelly for their
guidance and criticism during various phases of the
research. The author also wishes to thank D. P.
Crowne and L. H. Ford for their helpful comments
concerning portions of the final manuscript. To the
confederate experimenters from Hiram College, particularly to M. B. Herzbrun who served as research
assistant, the author expresses his gratitude.
Parts of the research were reported in a paper
read at the 1965 Midwestern Psychological Association convention.

551

1964). While these studies have investigated
self-ratings on characteristics that should follow if ego identity has been achieved, they
have not dealt explicitly with the psychosocial
criteria for determining degree of ego identity,
nor with testing hypotheses regarding direct
behavioral consequences of ego identity.
To assess ego identity, the present study
used measures and criteria congruent with
Erikson's formulation of the identity crisis
as a psychosocial task. Measures were a semistructured interview and an incomplete-sentences blank. The interview (see Method
section) was used to determine an individual's specific identity status; that is,
which of four concentration points along a
continuum of ego-identity achievement best
characterized him. The incomplete-sentences
blank served as an overall measure of identity
achievement. The criteria used to establish
identity status consisted of two variables,
crisis and commitment, applied to occupational choice, religion, and political ideology.
Crisis refers to the adolescent's period of
engagement in choosing among meaningful
alternatives; commitment refers to the degree
of personal investment the individual exhibits.
"Identity achievement" and "identity diffusion" are polar alternatives of status inherent in Erikson's theory. According to the
criteria employed in this study, an identityachievement subject has experienced a crisis
period and is committed to an occupation and
ideology. He has seriously considered several

552

JAMES E. IV ARCIA

occupational choices and has made a decision
on his own terms, even though his ultimate
choice may be a variation of parental wishes.
With respect to ideology, he seems to have
reevaluated past beliefs and achieved a resolution that leaves him free to act. In general,
he does not appear as if he would be overwhelmed by sudden shifts in his environment
or by unexpected responsibilities.
The identity-diffusion subject may or may
not have experienced a crisis period; his hallmark is a lack of commitment. He has neither
decided upon an occupation nor is much concerned about it. Although he may mention a
preferred occupation, he seems to have little
conception of its daily routine and gives the
impression that the choice could be easily
abandoned should opportunities arise elsewhere. He is either uninterested in ideological
matters or takes a smorgasbord approach in
which one outlook seems as good to him as
another and he is not averse to sampling
from all.
Two additional concentration
points
roughly intermediate in this distribution are
the moratorium and foreclosure statuses. The
moratorium subject is in the crisis period
with commitments rather vague; he is distinguished from the identity-diffusion subject
by the appearance of an active struggle to
make commitments. Issues often described as
adolescent preoccupy him. Although his parents' wishes are still important to him, he is
attempting a compromise among them, society's demands, and his own capabilities. His
sometimes bewildered appearance stems from
his vital concern and internal preoccupation
with what occasionally appear to him to be
unresolvable questions.
A foreclosure subject is distinguished by
not having experienced a crisis, yet expressing commitment. It is difficult to tell where
his parents' goals for him leave off and where
his begin. He is becoming what others have
prepared or intended him to become as a
child. His beliefs (or lack of them) are virtually "the faith of his fathers living still."
College experiences serve only as a confirmation of childhood beliefs. A certain rigidity
characterizes his personality; one feels that
if he were faced with a situation in which

parental values were nonfunctional, he would
feel extremely threatened.
Previous studies have found ego identity
to be related to "certainty of self-conception"
and "temporal stability of self-rating" (Bronson, 1959), extent of a subject's acceptance
of a false personality sketch of himself
(Gruen, 1960), anxiety (Block, 1961), and
sociometric ratings of adjustment (Rasmussen, 1964). Two themes predominate in these
studies: a variability-stability dimension of
self-concept, and overall adjustment. In general, subjects who have achieved ego identity
seem less confused in self-definition and
are freer from anxiety.
Four task variables were used to validate
the newly constructed identity statuses: a
concept-attainment task administered under
stressful conditions, a level of aspiration
measure yielding goal-setting patterns, a
measure of authoritarianism, and a measure
of stability of self-esteem in the face of
invalidating information.
The hypotheses investigated were these:
1. Subjects high in ego identity (i.e.,
identity-achievement status) will receive significantly lower (better) scores on the stressful concept-attainment task than subjects
lower in ego identity. Subjects who have
achieved an ego identity, with the internal
locus of self-definition which that implies,
will be less vulnerable to the stress conditions of evaluation apprehension and oversolicitousness (see Method section).
2. Subjects high in ego identity will set
goals more realistically than subjects low in
ego identity on a level of aspiration measure.
The increment to overall ego strength following identity achievement should be reflected
in the ego function of reality testing.
3. Subjects in the foreclosure status will
endorse "authoritarian submission and conventionality" items to a greater extent than
subjects in the other statuses.
4. There will be a significant positive relationship between ego identity measures and a
measure of self-esteem.
5. Subjects high in ego identity will change
less in self-esteem when given false information about their personalities than subjects
low in ego identity.

EGO-IDENTITY STATUS
6. There will be a significant relationship
between the two measures of ego identity:
the identity-status interview and the incomplete-sentences blank.
METHOD
Subjects
Subjects were 86 males enrolled in psychology,
religion, and history courses at Hiram College.

Confederate

Experimenters

Due to the possibility of contamination by subject
intercommunication on a small campus, the study
employed 10 confederate (task) experimenters who
administered the concept-attainment task in one
12-hour period to all subjects. These task experimenters, 7 males and 3 females, were members of
the author's class in psychological testing and had
taken three or more courses in psychology. They
had previously assisted in a pilot study and had
been checked twice by the author on their experimental procedure. The use of a sample of experimenters, none of whom were aware of the subjects'
standings on crucial independent variables, also has
advantages in terms of minimizing the effects of
experimenter bias (Rosenthal, 1964).
Identity status. Identity status was established by
means of a 15-30 minute semistructured interview.
All interviews followed the same outline, although
deviations from the standard form were permitted
in order to explore some areas more thoroughly. In
most cases, the criteria for terminating an interview
involved the completion of the prescribed questions
as well as some feeling of certainty on the interviewer's part that the individual had provided
enough information to be categorized. Interviews
were tape-recorded and then replayed for judging.
Hence, each interview was heard at least twice,
usually three or four times.
A scoring manual (Marcia, 1964) was constructed
using both theoretical criteria from Erikson and
empirical criteria from a pilot study. Each subject
was evaluated in terms of presence or absence of
crisis as well as degree of commitment for three
areas: occupation, religion, and politics—the latter
two combined in a general measure of ideology.
The interview judge familiarized himself with the
descriptions of the statuses provided in the manual
and sorted each interview into that pattern which
it most closely resembled. Analysis of interjudge
reliability for the identity statuses of 20 randomly
selected subjects among three judges yielded an
average percentage of agreement of 75. One of the
judges was essentially untrained, having been given
only the scoring manual and the 20 taped interviews.
A sample question in the occupational area was:
How willing do you think you'd be to give up
going into
if something better came along?

553

Examples of typical answers for the four statuses
were:
[Identity achievement] Well, I might, but I
doubt it. I can't see what "something better"
would be for me.
[Moratorium] I guess if I knew for sure I
could answer that better. It would have to be
something in the general area—something related.
[Foreclosure] Not very willing. It's what I've
always wanted to do. The folks are happy with it
and so am I.
[Identity diffusion] Oh sure. If something better
came along, I'd change just like that.
A sample question in the religious area was:
Have you ever had any doubts about your religious beliefs?
[Identity achievement] Yeah, I even started
wondering whether or not there was a god. I've
pretty much resolved that now, though. The way
it seems to me is . . . .
[Moratorium] Yes, I guess I'm going through
that now. I just don't see how there can be a god
and yet so much evil in the world or . . . .
[Foreclosure] No, not really, our family is
pretty much in agreement on these things.
[Identity diffusion] Oh, I don't know. I guess
so. Everyone goes through some sort of stage like
that. But it really doesn't bother me much. I
figure one's about as good as the other!
Overall ego identity. The Ego Identity Incomplete
Sentences Blank (EI-ISB) is a 23-item semistructured projective test requiring the subject to complete a sentence "expressing his real feelings" having
been given a leading phrase. Stems were selected and
a scoring manual designed (Marcia, 1964) according
to behaviors which Erikson (1956) relates to the
achievement of ego identity. Empirical criteria were
gathered during a pilot study. Each item was scored
3, 2, or 1 and item scores summed to yield an
overall ego-identity score. Two typical stems were:
If one commits oneself
, and, When I let
myself go I
Scoring criteria for the latter stem

are:
3—Nondisastrous self-abandonment. Luxuriating
in physical release. For example, have a good
time and do not worry about others' thoughts and
standards, enjoy almost anything that has laughter
and some physical activity involved, enjoy myself
more.
2—Cautiousness, don't know quite what will
happen, have to be careful. Defensive or trivial.
For example, never know exactly what I will say
or do, sleep, might be surprised since I don't
remember letting myself go.
1—Goes all to pieces, dangerous, self-destructive,
better not to. For example, think I talk too
much about myself and my personal interests,
tend to become too loud when sober and too

554

JAMES E. MARCIA

melodramatic when drunk, sometimes say things
I later regret.
Analysis of interscorer reliability for 20 protocols
among three judges yielded an average item-by-item
correlation of f = .76, an average total score correlation of f = .73, and an average percentage of
agreement of 74.

Measures of Task Variables
Concept Attainment Task performance. The Concept Attainment Task (CAT) developed by Bruner,
Goodnow, and Austin (1956) and modified by Weick
(1964), requires the subject to arrive at a certain
combination of attributes of cards. The subject may
eliminate certain attributes by asking whether a card
is positive or negative for the concept and he may
guess the concept at any time. He is penalized 5
points for every request, 10 points for every guess,
and S points for every 30 seconds that passes before
he attains the concept. Level of aspiration was obtained by informing the subject of his previous time
and asking him to estimate his time on the next
problem.
Quality of performance on the CAT was assessed
by the following measures: overall CAT scores
(points for time plus points for requests and
guesses), points for time alone, points for requests
and guesses alone, number of "give-ups" (problems
which the subject refused to complete). The main
level of aspiration measure was attainment discrepancy or D score, the algebraic average of the differences between a subject's stated expectancy for a
problem and his immediately preceding performance
on a similar problem.
A combination of two stress conditions (stress
defined here as externally imposed conditions which
tend to impair performance) were used: evaluation
apprehension and oversolicitousness. Evaluation apprehension refers to a subject's feeling that his
standing on highly valued personal characteristics
is to be exposed. The characteristic chosen for this
study was intellectual competence, unquestionably
salient for college students. Oversolicitousness was
chosen as a logical complement to evaluation apprehension. It was assumed that unnecessary reassurance
would validate and, hence, augment whatever anxiety
the subject was experiencing.
Pilot study data indicated that the stress conditions were effective. Using the same task experimenters as in the final study, 56 subjects (27 males
and 29 females) took the CAT under stress and
nonstress (i.e., stress omitted) conditions. Each experimenter ran about 3 stress and 3 nonstress subjects. Stressed subjects performed significantly more
poorly than nonstressed ones ({ = 2.61, df = 54,
p < .02).
Self-esteem change and authoritarianism. The SelfEsteem Questionnaire (SEQ-F) is a 20-item test
developed by deCharms and Rosenbaum (1960) on
which the subject indicates his degree of endorsement of statements concerning general feelings of
self-confidence and worthiness.

In addition, statements reflecting authoritarian
submission and conventionality, taken from the California F Scale (Adorno, Frenkel-Brunswik, Levinson,
& Sanford, 1950), which were originally filler items,
are used here as a dependent variable. The SEQ-F
was administered twice, the first time in a classroom
setting, the second, during the experimental situation
following an invalidated self-definition.
The treatment condition of "invalidated selfdefinition" (ISD) followed the CAT and directly
preceded the second administration of SEQ-F. It
consisted of giving the subject false information
concerning the relationship between his alleged selfevaluation and his actual personality.

Procedure
Following is the experimental procedure: Subjects
completed the EI-ISB and SEQ-F in class. Each
subject was interviewed to determine his identity
status. (This interviewing period lasted about 2
months.) On the day of the experiment, each subject went through the following conditions: (a)
Administration of the CAT under stress by the
task experimenter. Evaluation apprehension was
created by the task experimenter's saying:
By the way, I thought you might be interested
to know that this test is related to tests of intelligence 2 and that it's been found to be one of
the best single predictors of success in college.
So of course, you'll want to do your very best.
Oversolicitousness was created during CAT performance by the task experimenter's hovering over the
subject, asking him if he were comfortable, advising
him not to "tense up," not to "make it harder on
yourself." (6) Following the CAT, the subject was
seated in the author's office where he was given
either a positive or negative (randomly assigned)
invalidated self-definition. The subject found the
experimenter intently scanning a data sheet and was
told:
I've been looking over some of the data and it
seems that while you consider yourself less [more]
mature than other subjects, you actually come out
as being more [less] mature. Is there any way
you can account for this discrepancy? [Pause for
the subject's response.] This seems to hold up
also for self-confidence. It seems that you consider
yourself as having less [more] self-confidence
than other subjects, yet you actually come out
having more [less].
(c) The subject was then sent to another room
where he took the SEQ-F for the second time. The
following day, each subject received a postcard from
the experimenter explaining the false information.
2
In fact, intelligence test scores gleaned from the
subjects' college files did correlate significantly with
CAT performance (r=.$$, df = 82, p < .0005).
However, no significant relationship was found
between intelligence and identity status.

555

EGO-IDENTITY STATUS
TABLE 1
DIFFERENCES BETWEEN IDENTITY STATUSES IN CAT PERFORMANCE

Identity status
Identity achievement (A)
Moratorium (B)
Foreclosure (C)
Identity diffusion (D)
Groups compared
Time
A versus D
A versus B + C + D
A versus C
A -f- B + D versus C
Requests + guesses
A versus D
A versus B + C + D
A versus C
A + B + D versus C
Overall score
A versus D
A versus B + C + D
A versus C
A + B + D versus C

N

M time

SD

M requests
+ guesses

SD

M overall
score

SD

18
22
23
21

18.17
24.50
34.20
29.73

7.94
15.77
13.84
18.52

599.17
807.14
875.82
767.38

186.63
495.58
285.44
266.43

791.94
1024.82
1147.83
1078.57

244.15
612.04
407.98
352.38

t

2.39*
2.41**
2.90***
2.24*

2.19*
2.28*
3.47***
1.69
3.47***
2.45**
3.19***
1.63

* t < .05.
** f ? .02.

RESULTS
Performance on CAT
The relationship between the identity statuses and CAT performance was investigated
by means of individual t tests. These are
found in Table 1 and support the hypothesis
of significant differences in CAT performance
between subjects high and low in ego identity.
For all three indices of CAT performance
identity-achievement subjects perform significantly 3 better than identity-diffusion subjects
(^'s ranging from .01 to .05), and identity8

All significance levels for t tests are based on
two-tailed tests.

achievement subjects perform significantly
better than the other three statuses combined (p's ranging from .02 to .05).
Data involving the number of problems on
which the subjects in the different identity
statuses gave up are presented in Table 2.
Comparing identity-achievement subjects
with other subjects, significantly fewer instances of giving up on CAT problems are
found for the identity-achievement subjects.
This, together with the previous findings
concerning the relationship between identity
status and CAT performance under stress,
provides substantial confirmation of Hypothesis 1.

TABLE 2
NUMBER OF CAT PROBLEMS ON WHICH SUBJECTS IN EACH IDENTITY STATUS GAVE UP
Identity status

Give-ups
Completions
*p <.05.
** p < .02.

Identity
achievement

Moratorium

Foreclosure

Identity diffusion

All other

1
107
x" = 8.93*

7
125

13
131

11
109

31
365
X = 5.69**
2

556

JAMES E. MARCIA

An interesting supplementary finding is
that moratorium subjects were significantly
more variable in overall CAT scores than
subjects in the other three statuses combined
(^ma* = 2.62, df = 21/61, p < .05; see McNemar, 195S, pp. 244-247).
Correlations between all three CAT performance measures and the EI-ISB, while in
the expected direction, failed to reach significance. The Pearson r between overall CAT
performance and EI-ISB scores was —.14
(d/=82).
Level of Aspiration

TABLE 4
DIFFERENCES IN F SCORES BETWEEN
IDENTITY STATUSES

Identity status
Identity achievement (A)
Moratorium (B)
Foreclosure (C)
Identity diffusion (D)
Groups compared
C versus A
C versus A + B + D
D versus A
B versus A

SD

2V

M

18
23
24
21

34.28 8.99
37.57 8.05
45.17 9.01
38.67 10.19

t

3.88*
3.75*

.44

1.20

The D, or attainment discrepancy score,
reflects the difference between a subject's
Authoritarian Submission and Conventionalaspirations and his actual performance. An ity (F)
overall positive D score means that the subThe t tests presented in Table 4 show
ject tends to set his goals higher than his
attainment; a negative D score means the that foreclosure subjects received significantly
higher F scores than identity-achievement
opposite.
Inspection of original data revealed that subjects (£ = 3.88, df = 38, p < .001) and
no status obtained a negative average D also significantly higher F scores than the
score, the range being from 3.60 for identity other statuses combined (t = 3.75, df = 82,
achievement to 5.06 for foreclosure. Analysis p < .001).
of variance indicates a significant difference
among statuses in D score (F = 5.10, df Self-Esteem
= 3/80, p < .01). The t tests presented in
The significant relationship found here was
Table 3 show the foreclosure subjects exhibit- between EI-ISB scores and the initial SEQ
ing higher D scores than identity-achievement (r = .26, df =84, p < .01). No significant
subjects (* = 3.35, df = 38, p < .01) and differences among identity statuses for SEQ
higher D scores than the other statuses com- were found (F = .66, df = 3/82, ns). In
bined (t = 3.70, df = 82, p < .001). It ap- addition, self-esteem appeared to be unrelated
pears that foreclosure subjects tend to main- to authoritarian submission and conventiontain high goals in spite of failure.
ality (r = -.03, df = 84, ns) and to CAT
performance (r = —.03, df = 82, ns).
TABLE 3
Change in SEQ following ISO
DIFFERENCES IN D SCORE BETWEEN
IDENTITY STATUSES
Although differences in the expected direction were found (i.e., identity achievement
SD
t
2V
M
changed less than identity diffusion), these
Identity status
were
not significant (t = 1.39, df = 37, p
.80
Identity achievement (A) 18 3.60
< .20). Observer ratings of subjects' reacMoratorium (B)
22 4.11 .72
Foreclosure (C)
23 5.06 1.65
tions to the invalidated self-definition indiIdentity diffusion (D)
21 3.91 1.49
cated that this treatment condition was
Groups compared
effective. The failure to obtain significant
3.35*
C versus A
results
may have been due to unreliability
3.70**
C versus A + B + D
1.90
in the self-esteem measure engendered by the
B versus A
.57
C + B + D versus A
2-month span between the first and second
administration.
There was a tendency for
. .
**p < .001.
foreclosure subjects given negative informa-

EGO-IDENTITY STATUS
TABLE 5
DIFFERENCES BETWEEN IDENTITY STATUSES
IN EI-ISB SCORES

557

ship between such apparently diverse areas as
performance in a cognitive task and commitment to an occupation and ideology. The
interview and the CAT tapped two prime
2V
SD
/
M
spheres of ego function: the intrapsychic,
Identity status
seen on the CAT which required the indiIdentity achievement (A) 18 48.28 5.10
vidual to moderate between pressing internal
23 48.09 4.23
Moratorium (B)
stimuli (stress-produced anxiety) and exForeclosure (C)
24 46.17 4.62
21 43.33 3.52
Identity diffusion (D)
ternal demands (completion of the task),
and the psychosocial, seen in the interview
Groups compared
A versus C
1.37
which evaluated the meshing of the indi1.41
B versus C
vidual's needs and capabilities with society's
3.94*
B versus D
rewards and demands. The relationship be3.89*
A versus D
3.61*
A + C + B versus D
tween these two spheres contributes validity
to
both the identity statuses and to the
*p <, .001.
generality of the construct, ego.
No confirmation of the hypothesis relating
tion to show a greater decrease in self-esteem
ego
identity to resistance to change in selfthan identity-achievement subjects under simiesteem
was obtained, possibly because the
lar conditions (t = 2.60, dj = 19, p < .02).
length
of
time between the first and second
No relationship was found between EI-ISB
SEQ
administration
was 2 months. The variscores and self-esteem change (r = .001, dj
ability
in
subjects'
self-esteem over this
= 84, ns).
period of time may have obscured differences
due to treatment alone.
EI-ISB Scores and Identity Status
Following are experimentally derived proTwo techniques were employed to assess
files of each status:
the relationship between overall ego identity
1. Identity achievement. This group scored
as measured by EI-ISB and identity status.
highest on an independent measure of ego
These were an analysis of variance among
identity and performed better than other
the four statuses (F = 5.42, dj = 3/82, p
statuses on a stressful concept attainment
<.01), and t tests among the individual
task—persevering longer on problems and
statuses. The latter are found in Table 5.
maintaining a realistic level of aspiration.
Identity-achievement subjects received sigThey subscribed somewhat less than other
nificantly higher EI-ISB scores than did
statuses to authoritarian values and their selfidentity-diffusion subjects (t - 3.89, dj = 37,
esteem was a little less vulnerable to negative
p < .001), and the first three identity stat- information.
uses taken together received significantly
2. Moratorium. The distinguishing features
higher EI-ISB scores than did identity difof this group were its variability in CAT
fusion (t = 3.62, dj = 84, p< .001). Thus,
performance and its resemblance on other
the distinctive group with respect to EI-ISB measures to identity achievement.
scores appears to be identity diffusion. These
3. Foreclosure. This status' most outstandfindings lend some support to the hypotheing characteristic was its endorsement of
sized relationship between overall ego identity authoritarian values such as obedience,
and identity status.
strong leadership, and respect for authority.
Self-esteem was vulnerable to negative inDISCUSSION
formation and foreclosure subjects performed
Of the two approaches to the measurement more poorly on a stressful concept-attainment
of ego identity, the interview, based on indi- task than did identity-achievement subjects.
vidual styles, was more successful than the In addition, their response to failure on this
incomplete-sentences test, which treated ego task was unrealistic, maintaining, rather
identity as a simple linear quality.
than moderating, unattained high goals. This
Particularly interesting was the relation- behavior pattern is referred to by Rotter

558

JAMES E. MARCIA

(1954) as "low freedom of movement [and
is associated with] the achievement of
superiority through identification [pp. 196197]"—an apt description for one who is
becoming his parents' alter ego.
4. Identity diffusion. While this status was
originally considered the anchor point for
high-low comparisons with identity achievement, it occupied this position only in terms
of EI-ISB scores. CAT performance was uniformly poorer than that of identity achievement, although not the lowest among the
statuses. The identity-diffuse individuals to
which Erikson refers and identity-diffusion
subjects in this study may be rather different
with respect to extent of psychopathology.
A "playboy" type of identity diffusion may
exist at one end of a continuum and a schizoid
personality type at the other end. The
former would more often be found functioning reasonably well on a college campus.
While having tapped a rather complete range
of adjustment in the other statuses, the extent
of disturbance of an extreme identity diffusion would have precluded his inclusion
in our sample. Hence, it is the foreclosure,
and not the identity-diffusion, subject who
occupies the lowest position on most task
variables.
In conclusion, the main contribution of this
study lies in the development, measurement,
and partial validation of the identity statuses
as individual styles of coping with the psychosocial task of forming an ego identity.

REFERENCES
ADORNO, T. W., FRENKEL-BRUNSWIK, E., LEVINSON,
D. J., & SANFORD, R. N. The aitthorilarian personality. New York: Harper, 1950.
BLOCK, J. Ego identity, role variability, and adjustment. Journal of Consulting Psychology, 1961,
25, 392-397.
BRONSON, G. W. Identity diffusion in late adolescents.
Journal of Abnormal and Social Psychology,
1959, 59, 414-417.
BRUNER, J. S., GOODNOW, I. J., & AUSTIN, G. A. A
study of thinking. New York: Wiley, 1956.
DECHARMS, R., & ROSENBACM, M. E. Status variables
and matching behavior. Journal of Personality,
1960, 28, 492-502.
ERIKSON, E. H. The problem of ego identity.
Journal of the American Psychoanalytic Association, 1956, 4, 56-121.
ERIKSON, E. H. Childhood and society. (2nd ed.)
New York: Norton, 1963.
GRUEN, W. Rejection of false information about
oneself as an indication of ego identity. Journal
of Consulting Psychology, 1960, 24, 231-233.
MARCIA, J. E. Determination and construct validity
of ego identity status. Unpublished doctoral dissertation, Ohio State University, 1964.
MCNEMAR, Q. Psychological statistics. (2nd ed.)
New York: Wiley, 1955.
RASMUSSEN, J. E. The relationship of ego identity
to psychosocial effectiveness. Psychological Reports,
1964, 15, 815-825.
ROSENTHAL, R. Experimenter outcome-orientation
and the results of the psychological experiment.
Psychological Bulletin, 1964, 61, 405-412.
ROTTER, J. B. Social learning and clinical psychology.
Englewood Cliffs, N. J.: Prentice-Hall, 1954.
WEICK, K. E. Reduction of cognitive dissonance
through task enhancement and effort expenditure.
Journal of Abnormal and Social Psychology, 1964,
68, 533-539.
(Received March 19, 1965)

