Article
                                                                                 Educational and Psychological
                                                                                                 Measurement
Can High-Dimensional                                                                                      1–28
                                                                                         Ó The Author(s) 2020
Questionnaires Resolve the                                                             Article reuse guidelines:
                                                                             sagepub.com/journals-permissions
Ipsativity Issue of Forced-                                                  DOI: 10.1177/0013164420934861
                                                                              journals.sagepub.com/home/epm

Choice Response Formats?


Niklas Schulte1* , Heinz Holling1 and
Paul-Christian Bürkner2




Abstract
Forced-choice questionnaires can prevent faking and other response biases typically
associated with rating scales. However, the derived trait scores are often unreliable
and ipsative, making interindividual comparisons in high-stakes situations impossible.
Several studies suggest that these problems vanish if the number of measured traits is
high. To determine the necessary number of traits under varying sample sizes, factor
loadings, and intertrait correlations, simulations were performed for the two most
widely used scoring methods, namely the classical (ipsative) approach and Thurstonian
item response theory (IRT) models. Results demonstrate that while especially
Thurstonian IRT models perform well under ideal conditions, both methods yield
insufficient reliabilities in most conditions resembling applied contexts. Moreover, not
only the classical estimates but also the Thurstonian IRT estimates for questionnaires
with equally keyed items remain (partially) ipsative, even when the number of traits is
very high (i.e., 30). This result not only questions earlier assumptions regarding the
use of classical scores in high-dimensional questionnaires, but it also raises doubts
about many validation studies on Thurstonian IRT models because correlations of
(partially) ipsative scores with external criteria cannot be interpreted in a usual way.



1
 University of Münster, Germany
2
 Aalto University, Espoo, Finland
*
 Niklas Schulte is now at the University of Ulm, Germany

Corresponding Author:
Niklas Schulte, Institute of Psychology and Education, University of Ulm, Albert-Einstein-Allee 41, 89081
Ulm, Germany.
Email: niklas.schulte@uni-ulm.de
2                                       Educational and Psychological Measurement 00(0)


Keywords
forced-choice format, Thurstonian IRT model, ipsative data, multidimensional IRT


Psychometric assessments largely depend on self-reports based on Likert-type scales,
but these rating scales are susceptible to a number of biases such as acquiescence,
extremity/midpoint bias, leniency/severity tendencies, and faking attempts (Paulhus
& Vazire, 2007; Wetzel, Böhnke, & Brown, 2016), reference group effects (Credé
et al., 2010) as well as idiosyncratic interpretations of anchor labels (Wetzel &
Greiff, 2018). Each of these effects can compromise the validity of the derived factor
scores. To overcome these issues, forced-choice (FC) scales have been proposed,
where respondents have to choose between (or rank) two or more equally attractive
items. Omitting ratings by design, this technique eliminates all rating scale-related
biases (acquiescence, extremity, leniency, etc.). Most important, according to a
meta-analysis by Cao and Drasgow (2019), FC tests are an effective approach to
drastically reduce faking and – if tests are constructed and scored appropriately –
even have the potential to completely prevent score inflation in a socially desirable
direction.
    Researchers have been employing FC questionnaires not only in high-stakes situa-
tions like personnel selection (Christiansen et al., 2005; Stewart et al., 2010) and per-
formance appraisals (Brown et al., 2017) but also for constructs in which highly
socially desirable response behavior is to be expected such as value measurement
(van Eijnatten et al., 2015; Merk et al., 2017) and dark triad measurement (Paulhus
& Jones, 2014; Young, 2018). Other areas of application are market research (Parvin
& Wang, 2014) and comparative cultural studies where response biases vary between
cultures (He et al., 2014; T. Johnson et al., 2005).
    The main challenge associated with FC scales is the amount and nature of infor-
mation included in the answers. Traditional scoring approaches yield ipsative scores,
that is, the scores of each individual on different dimensions sum up to the same
total, making comparisons between individuals impossible (Hicks, 1970). The most
widely used method that has been designed to solve this issue is the Thurstonian item
response theory (T-IRT) model (Brown & Maydeu-Olivares, 2011); as this model
offers the promise of faking-resistant normative scores in high-stakes situations, it
has been the subject of considerable research. Many for-profit test developers have
adjusted their instruments accordingly and a substantial part of the literature on T-
IRT has been (co)authored by for-profit test developers (e.g., Anguiano-Carrasco
et al., 2015; Brown & Bartram, 2013; Brown et al., 2017; Joubert et al., 2015;
Lewis, 2015; Lin & Brown, 2017; Walton et al., 2019; Watrin et al., 2019), demon-
strating the practical relevance of the model.
    Yet a recent simulation suggests that simply changing the parameter estimation
method does not lead to sufficiently reliable estimates for many FC questionnaires
(Bürkner et al., 2019). When the simulated questionnaires measured five or fewer
traits, the model failed to reach a satisfactory level of measurement precision in all
Schulte et al.                                                                         3


practically relevant conditions. They performed especially poorly when the factor
loadings of all items had the same sign within one block, that is, were equally keyed.
Item keying refers to the sign of the factor loading (not to their absolute value). Its
influence on the reliability of factor scores was already described in the first publica-
tion on T-IRT models (Brown & Maydeu-Olivares, 2011). Equally keyed items are a
necessary – although not sufficient – condition for maintaining the resistance to fak-
ing in practice. Given a pair of two mixed keyed items, the positively keyed item will
typically cover the desired end of the trait continuum, while the negatively keyed
item will represent the undesired end of the corresponding trait. Therefore, in a high-
stakes situation, many respondents will engage in socially desirable responding and
choose the more desirable item (the same argument applies if negatively keyed items
cover the desirable end of the continuum).
    In contrast to T-IRT models that measure few traits, T-IRT models have per-
formed well when measuring 30 traits even with only equally keyed items (Bürkner
et al., 2019). Even though this trait number represents the most prominent FC person-
nel selection test, namely the Occupational Personality Questionnaire (OPQ; Brown
& Bartram, 2013), most test constructors seek to develop tests with fewer traits.
Indeed, inductive methods of test development will rarely suggest such a high num-
ber of dimensions, and, in theory-driven approaches, they violate the principle of par-
simony. Therefore, most of the popular personality models (e.g., Big Five, Dark
Triad) consist of significantly fewer dimensions. This is also reflected in the tests
evaluated with T-IRT so far, which typically measure between three and 15 dimen-
sions (e.g., Anguiano-Carrasco et al., 2015; Guenole et al., 2018; Lewis, 2015; Merk
et al., 2017; Watrin et al., 2019). The practical utility of the T-IRT method therefore
largely depends on its ability to derive precise reliable person parameter estimates
from questionnaires with only equally keyed items and fewer than 30 traits. Until
now, it has been unknown how T-IRT models perform when measuring between five
and 30 traits. The present simulation study seeks to establish the minimal trait num-
ber that is required to obtain person parameter estimates from FC questionnaires ana-
lyzed with T-IRT that show a high (squared) correlation with true trait scores (i.e., a
high reliability) and low absolute estimation errors (i.e., a low root mean square error
[RMSE]).
    Before elaborated analysis strategies such as T-IRT became available recently, FC
tests were scored with very simple methods that basically rely on assigning points to
the latent dimension each time an item of this dimension is picked or is highly ranked
(Hontangas et al., 2015). These approaches result in ipsative person parameters, such
that the score of an individual on one trait is dependent on that individual’s score on
the other measured traits. Such scores are said to be inappropriate for interindividual
comparisons (Cattell, 1944; Hicks, 1970) and are associated with a number of psy-
chometric issues (Baron, 1996). Remarkably, advocates of these scoring procedures
have demonstrated that classical ipsative scores can be reliable and highly correlated
to normative scores if a large number of traits (such as 30) is measured (Baron, 1996;
Bartram, 1996; Saville & Willson, 1991). This raises the question of how much better
4                                       Educational and Psychological Measurement 00(0)


T-IRT estimates are compared with traditional scoring methods. On one hand, we
can only identify critical issues such as low reliability and biased intertrait correlation
estimates for T-IRT models in conditions under which traditional scoring methods
fail (i.e., when measuring up to five traits; Bartram, 1996), whereas, on the other
hand, T-IRT seems to yield good results under conditions in which traditional scoring
procedures yield sensible results, too. These observations suggest that some designs
are inherently less informative than others. It is, however, unknown whether T-IRT
really extends the range of questionnaires that can be soundly analyzed compared
with other longstanding and much simpler approaches. While the incorporation of
factor loadings and trait intercorrelations by T-IRT models can be expected to offer
some improvement in measurement precision, the size – and therefore the practical
relevance of this improvement – is unknown to date.
    Furthermore, earlier simulations were designed to establish the measurement pre-
cision (i.e., reliability and RMSE) of FC questionnaires under optimal conditions.
Therefore, the present study seeks to evaluate the measurement precision under less
optimal circumstances such as smaller sample sizes and lower (and perhaps more rea-
listic) factor loadings. With regard to the latter, the favorable judgments on the qual-
ity of T-IRT estimates from high-dimensional questionnaires, for instance, are based
on simulations with (what we now think are) unusually high factor loadings between
.65 and .95 (Bürkner et al., 2019). In the present study, we will additionally use factor
loadings derived from the NEO-PI-R (Costa & McCrae, 1992; Ostendorf & Angleitner,
2004) – the most widely used high-dimensional personality questionnaire – leading to
more realistic loading patterns in the simulated questionnaires.
    The present study was designed to determine which FC designs that have the
potential to be faking resistant (through the use of only equally keyed factor items)
can under realistic conditions (i.e., with varying sample sizes and typical factor load-
ings) yield acceptable psychometric properties. Further, the comparison of classical
and T-IRT scoring will demonstrate the influence of the estimation procedure.


The Thurstonian IRT Model
The Thurstonian IRT model has been described in detail elsewhere (e.g., Brown &
Maydeu-Olivares, 2011, 2012; Bürkner et al., 2019), so we keep its introduction
brief. Independent of the exact format of the forced-choice questionnaire, that is,
whether the responses imply a full or partial ranking of all alternatives in a given
block, responses can be represented by a set of pairwise binary choices (Brown &
Maydeu-Olivares, 2011). We write ypik to indicate the binary choice of person p
between two items i and k. We set ypik = 1 if the person’s response indicates that they
prefer item i over item k and set ypik = 0 otherwise. Under a Thurstonian model, we
assume that each item i evokes a latent utility tpi which describes the psychological
value or desirableness of item i for person p (Maydeu-Olivares & Böckenholt, 2005;
Thurstone, 1927). If we further assume a unidimensional factor model for tpi based
Schulte et al.                                                                            5


on some univariate person trait ha (Brown & Maydeu-Olivares, 2011; Bürkner et al.,
2019), we can write

                                   tpi = mi + li hap + epi ,                            ð1Þ

    where mi is the mean of the latent utility across persons, li is the factor loading on
trait ha , and epi is an independently normally distributed error term with variance c2i .
In Thurstonian IRT models, only the differences between the utilities ti and tk are of
interest, and so we define ypik = tpi  tpk as the latent preference of person p for item i
over item k. This implies that ypik = 1 if ypik  0 and ypik = 0 otherwise. Supposing
that item i loads on trait ha and item k loads on trait hb , we can write ypik as

                       ypik = mi + li hap + epi  mk  lk hbp  epk :                  ð2Þ

   Following Brown and Maydeu-Olivares (2011), we simplify the mean structure
and set  g ik = mi  mk so that each pair of compared items effectively has its own
mean parameter. Under the additional assumption that all traits h are multivariate
normal with correlation matrix F as well as, for identification, means of 0 and var-
iances of 1, we can formulate the probability that ypik = 1 as
                                      0                        1
                                      Bg ik + li hap  lk hbp C
                       P(ypik = 1) = F@      qﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ   A:                 ð3Þ
                                                c2i + c2k

   If we aim to use Equation (3) as the pointwise likelihood outside of a structural
equation framework, additional item-specific terms have to be incorporated to
account for the residual dependency between different comparisons involving the
same item (see Bürkner et al., 2019, for details).


Evidence on Model Properties From Validations With Real-World Data
The promising prospect of faking-resistant normative scores has impelled many test
developers to switch over from classical (ipsative) scoring procedures to T-IRT or to
develop new FC-based tests scored with T-IRT (e.g., Anguiano-Carrasco et al.,
2015; Brown & Bartram, 2013; Guenole et al., 2018; Lewis, 2015; Merk et al., 2017;
Watrin et al., 2019). However, in order to really judge the model’s validity and util-
ity, scholars have engaged in a number of validation studies. These can be roughly
divided into the following categories: attempts to evaluate the appropriateness of the
theoretical model, which describes how respondents form their answers; studies that
compare the model with traditional scoring methods; and investigations that examine
the question of whether T-IRT FC scales yield more valid parameter estimates than
rating scales.
    With respect to the theoretical assumptions on the response process, respondents
have indeed reported in a think-aloud task that they make pairwise comparisons
6                                       Educational and Psychological Measurement 00(0)


between all items of a block (Sass et al., 2018). In that study, where blocks of three
items were used, 76% of participants reported to have no difficulty keeping in mind
the information related to all statements in order to appraise the relative utility of all
items. Thus, the Law of Comparative Judgement (Thurstone, 1927) seems to be a rea-
sonable explanation for the response process in most of the respondents. However, it
is likely that larger blocks will lead to more severe violations of model assumptions,
as cognitive load increases with higher numbers of necessary comparisons. When
asked directly, participants have stated that it is harder to express accurately their
actual attitude toward the items in FC compared with rating formats (Watrin et al.,
2019).
    Regarding studies that have compared the T-IRT model with traditional scoring
methods, results are mixed. One study found more consistent correlations with exter-
nal criteria for T-IRT scores (Anguiano-Carrasco et al., 2015), two found very simi-
lar results for both methods (Lee et al., 2018; Wetzel, Roberts, et al., 2016, with an
advantage for T-IRT on one subscale) and one study observed similar convergent but
problematic discriminant validities for T-IRT scores (Walton et al., 2019).
Counterintuitively, in one study T-IRT scores did not predict job performance (mean
r = :00) while the classical (ipsative) scores for the same questionnaire did (mean
r = :38; Fisher et al., 2019). Together, there is no reason to expect improved validity
for T-IRT per se when compared with classical scoring approaches based on the cur-
rent data.
    The third line of validation studies compares FC T-IRT scales with rating scales.
These studies are much more challenging to conduct and interpret as the results of a
specific validation study depend on and are limited to the specifications of the con-
crete test at hand (keyed direction of items, number of traits, trait intercorrelations,
etc.) and the situation of the study (e.g., high-stakes vs. low-stakes). Unlike when
comparing several scoring methods for the same questionnaire, here the source of the
data (FC vs. rating) differs, and different sources might be differentially affected by
the variation in the questionnaires and the situational characteristics. Nonetheless,
previous validation efforts have provided some insights. FC T-IRT scores correlate
substantially with corresponding rating scales (on average .76 in Guenole et al.,
2018, .79 in Lee et al., 2018, and .62 in Watrin et al., 2019). The associations are
high, but together with differential loading patterns (Guenole et al., 2018), these
results suggest at least slightly variant trait meanings. In another study, T-IRT esti-
mates resulted in more stable personality profile solutions between honest and faking
conditions, and ratings scales turned out to be more fakeable than FC T-IRT esti-
mates for participants with an extreme level of faking tendency (Lee et al., 2019).
Comparing the validity of FC T-IRT and rating scales, three studies report equal or
somewhat lower validities for FC T-IRT (Anguiano-Carrasco et al., 2015; Brown &
Maydeu-Olivares, 2013; Lee et al., 2018), and one study reports comparable diver-
gent validities but slightly better predictions of school grades as a criterion (Watrin
et al., 2019). One limitation of most of these studies is the use of validation scales
with a rating format. Such scales share common-method variance with the rating
Schulte et al.                                                                          7


version of the evaluated questionnaire, and the horse-race approach is therefore
biased in favor of the rating scale. Only one study incorporated both FC and rating
scale versions of the validated (Big Five) and validating (HEXACO) questionnaires
as well as other-ratings (Wetzel & Frick, 2019). In this study, some intertrait correla-
tions of the FC questionnaire differed drastically from those of the rating scale ver-
sion of the same questionnaire and from meta-analytic estimates for Big Five
intercorrelations, suggesting potential issues in the estimation of intertrait correla-
tions. Convergent validities with another Big Five questionnaire and other-ratings as
well as cross-response format comparisons in Big Five and HEXACO questionnaires
did not result in consistent evidence in favor of T-IRT FC. In this study, there was no
relevant difference between T-IRT FC and rating scales in the prediction of a variety
of criteria. However, all of the aforementioned studies were conducted under low-
stakes situations in which respondents are hardly expected to fake, such that in these
situations FC questionnaires will not benefit from their potential resistance to faking.
Indeed, in the only study conducted in a medium-stakes situation (360° feedback)
using an FC scale as a criterion, validity estimates of FC T-IRT scales were superior
compared with rating scales (Brown et al., 2017). Yet in that study, rating scales ana-
lyzed with a special bias factor reached convergent validity levels that were equal to
those of T-IRT estimates.
    In sum, the literature on the validity of T-IRT estimates does not draw a clear pic-
ture in favor of FC-based T-IRT estimates compared with rating scales or tradition-
ally scored FC scales. Yet one viable way to understand which aspects of the
questionnaire design might have contributed to these mixed findings and to identify
aspects that can promote precise parameter estimates is by performing simulation
studies. Next, we will summarize evidence from prior simulations.


Evidence From Earlier Simulations
Two simulations studies investigated how well item parameters and latent trait scores
can be recovered (Brown & Maydeu-Olivares, 2011; Bürkner et al., 2019; but see
also, Xiao et al., 2017).
    The first simulations were performed for the initial publication of the T-IRT model
(Brown & Maydeu-Olivares, 2011). This study showed that the factors’ test length
(12 or 24 items per trait), correlation among traits (0, .5, 2.5), and block size (two,
three, or four items per trait were simulated) all affect the accuracy of item and per-
son parameters. However, by far the most important aspect is the keyed direction of
items (only equally keyed vs. mixed keyed). More specifically, T-IRT performs well
in most conditions where mixed keyed items are used. In contrast, the model’s ability
to reliably estimate person parameters with only positively keyed items was brought
into question as the squared correlation between true and estimated trait scores was
unsatisfactorily low. Equally keyed items seem to recover differences between traits
(i.e., their relative position) very well but contribute little to the estimation of their
sums, and, thus, are less useful for recovering the trait’s absolute location (Brown &
8                                       Educational and Psychological Measurement 00(0)


Maydeu-Olivares, 2011). This issue is further exacerbated when both measured traits
are positively correlated (see Equations 21 and 22 as well as Table 3 in Brown &
Maydeu-Olivares, 2011).
    However, the ability of FC tests to rely on equally keyed items is very important
for their faking resistance. It is only when respondents have to choose between
equally desired options that the rationale behind FC items can prevent socially desir-
able responding. This prerequisite is violated on a regular basis if one item with a
positive and one item with a negative factor loading are compared within the same
block. Without loss of generality, we assume that higher trait values are more desir-
able for the traits we are concerned with (the argument works regardless of that
assumption). In this case, positively keyed items will represent the desired end and
negatively keyed items the undesired end of one trait continuum, making compari-
sons with unequally keyed items prone to socially desirable responding. However,
FC tests’ anticipated faking resistance was the primary reason for introducing FC
techniques in contexts like personnel selection or performance appraisals and accept-
ing some possibility of faking in exchange for reliable estimates might be misleading.
For example, the reliability level that simulation studies suggest for equally keyed
items is based on a generative model assuming that respondents will choose the item
which describes them best. If respondents can identify an ‘‘optimal’’ – that is, social
desirable item – many will choose (or highly rank) this item, and the respective block
will contribute less information to the parameter estimation (Wang et al., 2017).
Therefore, employing mixed keyed items in high-stakes situations may result in
much lower reliabilities than simulations suggest. It should be mentioned that invert-
ing individual traits (e.g., neuroticism instead of emotional stability) or mixing
desired and undesired traits (e.g., Big Five and Dark Triad) only relocates the prob-
lem. This is because FC questionnaires need both equally and unequally keyed com-
parisons for each trait to estimate factor scores precisely (see the section on scoring
procedures). For a detailed discussion of problems arising from mixed keyed items in
FC questionnaires, see Bürkner et al. (2019).
    In a second simulation study (Bürkner et al., 2019), neither frequentist estimation
via Mplus (Muthén & Muthén, 2015) and lavaan (Rosseel, 2012) nor a Bayesian esti-
mation via Stan (Carpenter et al., 2017) yielded sufficiently accurate trait scores for
most conditions in which equally keyed items were used. Intertrait correlation esti-
mates showed a considerable bias in these conditions, suggesting that person para-
meters remained partially ipsative. Individual standard errors were more than twice
as high for very high and very low scores than for average trait scores. Thus, in
applied contexts, extremely (un)qualified applicants, employees, and so on, cannot
easily be separated from average test-takers which is the very reason for administer-
ing such questionnaires. Nevertheless, this study also gave hints on how to improve
measurement precision even when only equally keyed items are used: In a condition
with 30 traits and a realistic intertrait correlation matrix (i.e., heterogeneous correla-
tions taken from a real-world questionnaire), the model yielded a very high reliabil-
ity, and intertrait correlations were estimated without relevant bias.
Schulte et al.                                                                         9


    The results of the latter study raise three different questions. First, the excellent
measurement precision in the condition with 30 traits suggests that fewer than 30
traits would likewise result in adequate reliability levels. Though, until now there has
been no evidence on model properties in the range of five and 30 traits, because ear-
lier simulations only investigated up to five traits and the isolated case of 30 traits.
Second, how much do simulation results depend on the high factor loadings used so
far? These questions will be subject to the simulations presented. Third, some have
claimed that traditional scoring methods can also yield non-ipsative scores if the
number of measured traits is high (Bartram, 1996; Saville & Willson, 1991); we will
discuss this fact in the following section.


Classical Scoring Approaches for Forced-Choice Items
Until recently, FC questionnaires have been scored following a very simple proce-
dure. For the RANK format for instance, in which the task is to rank all items of a
block, the inverted rank order of the items is added to their respective scales. Given
a block of three items, the scale of the most highly ranked item is assigned three
points, the second two points and the least preferred item one point. Of course, all
linear transformations of this scoring – such as {21, 0, 1} – are permitted and have
no influence on the diagnostic information the scores contain. Scorings for other
tasks like MOLE (choose the MOst and LEast decriptive item) and PICK (pick one
item) slightly differ but follow the same rationale, as they represent partial rankings
(for an overview, see Hontangas et al., 2015). There is no consent in the literature on
how to treat mixed keyed items in such scorings. With few exceptions (e.g., Lee
et al., 2018), this question is largely ignored in most relevant articles.
   Irrespective of that point, we can state for positively keyed items that this scoring
procedure yields ipsative person parameter estimates (Saville & Willson, 1991). A
measure is ipsative if all measured dimensions sum to the same total for each individ-
ual (Clemans, 1966). The units of ipsative scales are relative to other measurements
on the same person (Cattell, 1944). Consequently, each individual’s score depends on
their own score on all other dimensions and is not comparable with scores of other
respondents. However, most measurements require normative person parameters. A
measurement is normative if ‘‘subjects are placed in order relative to one another and
assigned a standard score in terms of the population distribution’’ (Cattell, 1944, p.
293). For a discussion of statistical and psychometric problems of ipsative scales, see
not only Hicks (1970), and Baron (1996) but also consider C. E. Johnson et al. (1988)
as well as Meade (2004) for issues in personnel selection.
   Besides all criticism, proponents of ipsative FC scales have argued that a sweep-
ing rejection of classical scoring approaches is unreasonable. It seems that under cer-
tain circumstances, reliable and valid person parameters can be derived from ipsative
questionnaires and that these scores can be interpreted like normative measures
(Baron, 1996; Bartram, 1996; Saville & Willson, 1991). In one simulation, classi-
cally scored ipsative questionnaires correlated highly with true scores when
10                                      Educational and Psychological Measurement 00(0)


measuring 32 traits and correlated more weakly but still on a high level when fewer
traits were simulated (16 and seven traits respectively; Saville & Willson, 1991).
Saville and Willson (1991) also report comparable validity estimates for the rating
and FC version of a 30-trait real-world questionnaire (but, see Cornwell & Dunlap,
1994, for critical response). A second simulation confirmed that with 30 scales and
low intertrait correlations, ipsative scores are both reliable and highly correlated with
normative ones (Bartram, 1996). We assume the underlying reason for the positive
effect of higher trait numbers to be the following: Imagine two questionnaires with
ideal items (factor loadings of 1, all-zero intercorrelations), one with two and another
with 30 traits being measured. Now, for example, a person has an extremely high
score on Trait 1, a slightly lower but still high score on Trait 2, somewhat lower
scores on the other traits. Further, for simplicity, suppose that the response model is
fully deterministic. Under these assumptions and the Law of Comparative Judgement
(Thurstone, 1927), the person will always reject the items of Trait 2 in the two-trait
questionnaire resulting in a very low score on Trait 2. In the 30-trait questionnaire,
the person does not have to reject all items of Trait 2, but can express this trait’s high
value in the preference of this trait’s items in comparisons were items of Trait 1 are
not involved, resulting in a more realistic estimate of Trait 2. More generally, the
more characteristics are measured, the more nuances in characteristic differences can
be expressed in the responses.
    Taken together, we can state that T-IRT models only yield acceptable measure-
ment precision under exactly those conditions under which the much simpler tradi-
tional scoring approaches also seem to work quite well. Because T-IRT models
incorporate factor loadings and intertrait correlations into person parameter estima-
tion, we expect T-IRT to yield at least equal measurement precision and, in all
applied conditions (i.e., nonzero intercorrelations, factor loadings less than 1), super-
ior measurement precision. Though, whether the increase in precision is substantial
enough to justify the much more complicated estimation procedure is an unanswered
question. Additionally, a direct comparison of both scoring formats is of interest
because several validation studies compare both formats, and results do not necessa-
rily indicate the superiority of T-IRT as compared with classical scoring approaches
(Lee et al., 2018; Walton et al., 2019; Wetzel, Roberts, et al., 2016).


Method
Simulation Conditions
We simulated a maximum of 30 traits because this amount has been repeatedly dis-
cussed as a number at which even traditional scoring methods are free from most
limitations of ipsative scores (Baron, 1996; Bartram, 1996; Saville & Willson, 1991).
Additionally, the most prominent commercial FC questionnaire, the OPQ, measures
– depending on the version – 30 or 32 traits (Brown & Bartram, 2011; Saville et al.,
1992). Sample sizes in earlier simulations were comparably high (1,000 observations
in Brown & Maydeu-Olivares, 2011, and 2,000 observations in Bürkner et al., 2019).
Schulte et al.                                                                       11


Such high sample sizes optimize the estimation of model parameters, but in practice,
samples of this size are not always available. In order to examine the model proper-
ties under conditions which are realistic for companies applying personnel selection
tests or researchers conducting a laboratory study, the sample size was varied
between N = 100 and N = 1000 (see below for details). Further, we aimed to assure a
realistic level of factor loadings. Prior simulations draw loadings from a uniform dis-
tribution between .65 and .95 (Brown & Maydeu-Olivares, 2011) or between .65 and
.95 and additionally between .3 and .7 for some conditions (Bürkner et al., 2019).
However, in the one condition in which T-IRT models estimated person parameters
precisely and resistantly against faking (i.e., with 30 traits and only equally keyed
items within a block) only loadings between .65 and .95 were simulated. This is
unsatisfactory, as factor loadings are often lower in practice. A well-known psycho-
metric questionnaire measuring 30 traits is the NEO-PI-R (Costa & McCrae, 1992).
We conducted a CFA with the norming sample of the German version (Ostendorf &
Angleitner, 2004) and found factor loadings to be approximately normally distributed
with M = 0:5 and SD = 0:16. This empirical approach was used to simulate realistic
factor loadings based on a real-world questionnaire. Additionally, we sampled factor
loadings uniformly between .65 and .95 to maintain comparability with Brown and
Maydeu-Olivares (2011) as well as Bürkner et al. (2019) and to see what effect
higher factor loadings would have.
    Together, 384 conditions were examined by crossing the following factors: (a)
scoring procedure (classic vs. T-IRT); (b) number of traits NT from five to 30 in steps
of 5; (c) sample size N with the levels 100, 300, 500, and 1,000; (d) keyed direction
of items with either all positive factor loadings (referred to as equally keyed) or with
one half of the factor loadings having positive and one half having negative factor
loadings (termed mixed or unequally keyed); (e) factor loadings drawn from a uni-
form distribution between .65 and .95 or truncated normal distribution with M = 0:5
and SD = 0:16 within the limits of 0.1 and 0.9; (f) intertrait correlations which were
either all set to 0 or taken from the German version of the NEO-PI-R (Ostendorf &
Angleitner, 2004) to represent a set of realistic intercorrelations. Because the NEO-
PI-R measures six facets of five dimensions, the subset of intercorrelations was chan-
ged six times within each condition. We balanced the number of facets per dimension
within each matrix. Each correlation matrix was used for two replications leading to
632 = 12 replications per condition. The exact mechanism for matrix extraction is
documented in the scripts on OSF (Open Science Framework; https://osf.io/t6krs/).
The number of comparisons between traits was not balanced, which means that not
every trait was compared equally frequently with every other trait. In the case of
high-dimensional questionnaires, such a balancing leads to a questionnaire length that
in practice can hardly be implemented.
    The following simulation factors were held constant: the number of items per
block was 3 (i.e., triplets), as it is the most widely used block size. Besides, with
larger block sizes, the number of paired comparisons necessary to rank all items of a
block drastically increases and the Law of Comparative Judgement (Thurstone,
12                                     Educational and Psychological Measurement 00(0)


1927) might no longer be a reasonable model for participants’ response process. We
use the RANK format, as it contains the maximum amount of information compared
with all other response formats and its superiority has been demonstrated expectedly
in earlier simulations (Hontangas et al., 2015). In the case of triplets, which we con-
sider here, RANK and MOLE formats are equivalent, because the option that is cho-
sen as neither the most nor the least descriptive is always in the second ranking
position. Further, we simulated nine blocks per trait. Despite the fact that higher
block numbers can slightly improve estimate precision (Bürkner et al., 2019), they
are unrealistic for the range of trait numbers considered here. The error variances c
were computed as c = 1  l2 as we simulated standardized factor loadings. The g
values (i.e., the models’ intercepts) were sampled uniformly between 21 and 1.
   Most of the conditions described here were preregistered (see https://osf.io/t6krs/).
The condition of high factor loadings ½0:65, 0:95 was added in the light of the other
results to explain why measurement precision falls off notably compared with the
results in Bürkner et al. (2019) under the preregistered conditions. The sample size
was initially fixed to N = 1000 but during the research process, we gained access to
high-performance computing capacities and expanded our design. In fact, to readers
interested in applying T-IRT models, we want to point out that most of the models
specified here take several days to be estimated with today’s computer performance
when estimated with full Bayesian estimation methods. Frequentist methods should
be faster but are often accompanied by convergence problems (Bürkner et al., 2019).


Scoring Procedures
The traditional scores were obtained as follows. Analogous to T-IRT procedures, rat-
ings were first transformed into paired comparisons (Brown & Maydeu-Olivares,
2011; Maydeu-Olivares & Böckenholt, 2005). Table 1 shows how pairs are scored
depending on the sign of the factor loading and the preferred item within the paired
comparison. For instance, if both items are positively keyed (first row) and the first
item is preferred over the second then a 1 is assigned to the trait score of the first
item and a 0 to the trait score of the second item’s latent dimension. This procedure
is repeated for each binary outcome of the paired comparisons. Thus, the trait score
is a sum of the assigned values.
    This scoring scheme closely resembles the scoring in Thurstonian IRT models
with factor loadings constrained to 1 in disregard of the intertrait correlation matrix.
The scheme reveals that equally and unequally keyed items contain two different
types of information. While responses to equally keyed items provide information
about the relative standing of traits within one person (but not about the absolute
scores), unequally keyed items contain information about absolute trait location com-
pared with other persons (assuming trait directions to be aligned; otherwise the role
of equally and unequally keyed items switches). However, one cannot state which of
the two latent traits within the paired comparison has the higher value based on
unequally keyed items. One consequence of this is that scores based on mixed keyed
Schulte et al.                                                                                           13


Table 1. Classical Scoring Scheme.

Sign of factor loading              Value added to trait if yik = 1        Value added to trait if yik = 0
First item       Second item        First item        Second item          First item        Second item

+                     +                  1                   0                  0                   1
+                     2                  1                   1                  0                   0
2                     +                  0                   0                  1                   1
2                     2                  0                   1                  1                   0

Note. If the first item is preferred over the second, this comparison is coded with 1. If the second item is
preferred over the first, this comparison is coded with 0.

items are no longer fully ipsative in the sense that the sum of trait scores are no longer
constant between individuals. Thus, this effect is not an exclusive property of T-IRT
but rather a general characteristic of FC questionnaires that contain mixed keyed items.
    For all T-IRT models we used the thurstonianIRT package (Bürkner, 2019) in R
(R Core Team, 2018) with Stan as the underlying engine. Stan is a programming lan-
guage for Bayesian statistics (Carpenter et al., 2017). The thurstonianIRT package
uses expected a posteriori (EAP) estimation and weakly informative default priors.
Priors largely avoid convergence issues frequently observed in frequentist implemen-
tations of T-IRT (Bürkner et al., 2019). The priors do not influence parameter estima-
tion considerably, and the Stan-based estimates correlated perfectly (r  :98) with
the frequentist implementation in Mplus (Muthén & Muthén, 2015) introduced by
Brown and Maydeu-Olivares (2012) in previous simulations (see Table 6 in Bürkner
et al., 2019). Item and person parameters were estimated jointly in each model. The
R code for all simulations and the postprocessing are available on OSF (https://osf.io/
t6krs/).


Measures of Parameter Recovery
The measurement precision of person parameter estimates was operationalized as (a)
the reliability and (b) the RMSE. Reliability is defined as the proportion of true varia-
tion relative to the total variation in the person parameters:

                                        Rel(^
                                            u, u) = Cor(^
                                                        u, u)2 :                                        ð4Þ

  In Equation (4), u represents the true and ^u the estimated person parameters. As a
measure of absolute fit, we will investigate the RMSE on a z-scale:
                                         vﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ
                                         u N
                                         u1 X                         2
                          RMSE(u, u) = t
                                  ^                   (^ui  ui ) ,               ð5Þ
                                            N i=1

with N being the number of persons over which the RMSE is computed.
14                                         Educational and Psychological Measurement 00(0)


    We evaluated the bias in the estimation of intertrait correlations by subtracting
the true intercorrelations from their estimates. The intercorrelational bias not only
indicates how well the true covariance structure is recovered but can also be an indi-
cation that model estimates suggest scale interdependencies where they actually do
not exist. Another more direct way to look at ipsativity issues is that they prevent the
identification of individuals who score low/high on all of the measured scales, that
is, person mean differences cannot be recovered. Therefore, we calculated the corre-
lations between individuals’ true and estimated score means over all measured traits:

                                           Cor(^
                                               
                                               u, 
                                                  u)                                         ð6Þ

with ^
     
     u being the mean of the estimated person parameters ui of person i over all mea-
sured traits and u being the mean of the true person parameters ui of person i over all
measured traits. If the variance of person means within one condition was zero, the
corresponding correlations were not defined. This applies in particular to the standard
scorings, where person means have no variance between persons as scores are per-
fectly ipsative. For illustrational purposes, we display these correlations as zero in the
graphics depicting the simulation results (with a note that they are not actually zero
but undefined).
   To quantify the uncertainty of model accuracy indicators, we calculated approxi-
mate confidence intervals based on their variance between the k trials of the same
simulation condition. For instance, the uncertainty of reliability estimates was quanti-
fied as follows:
                                               SDRel
                                      Rel61:963 pﬃﬃ                                          ð7Þ
                                                 k

with Rel being the mean and SDRel being the standard deviation of all k reliability
estimates in this condition. Approximate confidence intervals for other indicators
were calculated analogously.


Results
Figure 1 shows the reliability estimates for all simulated conditions. Overall, the factor
loadings exhibit the strongest effect. Higher loadings lead to more precise estimates in
both T-IRT and classical scorings. For scales with high factor loadings, T-IRT scores (red
lines) reach reliabilities of .8 or higher if items are mixed (i.e., half negatively) keyed or if
items are equally keyed and 10 or more traits are measured. In contrast, when more realis-
tic factor loadings are used, the reliability is considerably lower. The sample size has little
effect. Only when N = 100 does the reliability drop in some conditions. As expected, T-
IRT performs better than classical scores (blue lines) in most conditions, but the difference
does not exceed .1 units on the reliability scale. The number of traits shows differential
effects depending primarily on factor loadings (size and sign) and intercorrelation. In
some conditions, it shows no effect within the range of five to 30 traits. In other conditions
Schulte et al.                                                                             15




Figure 1. Reliability estimates. Realistic loadings = factor loadings from N(:5, :16), high
loadings = uniform(:65, :95), NEO intercorrelations are taken from the German NEO-PI-R.
Gray shaded areas are approximate confidence intervals.

(e.g., zero intercorrelations, high loadings & equally keyed items), the highest increase in
reliability is observed between five and 10 traits followed by an accumulating saturation.
For conditions where the reliability is constant within the range of five and 30 traits (e.g.,
for high loadings, mixed keyed items and zero intercorrelations), it can be assumed that
this saturation occurs already within the range of fewer than five traits. The intercorrela-
tions have no influence on the classical scores but do influence T-IRT scores. With T-
IRT, more reliable estimates are obtained if traits are intercorrelated in a realistic manner.
    Figure 2 shows the results for the RMSE as a second indicator of measurement
accuracy. The RMSE describes the absolute measurement error and gives direct
information about the expected accuracy of an individual measurement in the units
of the measured scale. The patterns between conditions mirror those of the reliabil-
ities. The absolute values are high with respect to most real-world questions. For the
practical relevant conditions (realistic loadings and intercorrelations, equally keyed
loadings), the T-IRT-based RMSE does not fall below :46 even under the most
favorable circumstances (N = 1000, Ntraits = 30). Under the assumption of normally
distributed person parameter estimates, this yields a confidence interval of
½1:963:46, 1:963:46 = ½:90, :90 on a z-scale for an average person, covering
63% of the population. Compared with the RMSEs of the T-IRT estimates, those
based on the standard scoring are equal or higher. For the same condition as
described before, the standard scoring yields an RMSE of :67, and therefore, results
in an even larger confidence interval of ½1:31, 1:31.
16                                      Educational and Psychological Measurement 00(0)




Figure 2. Root mean square error (RMSE) estimates for all simulation conditions. Realistic
loadings = factor loadings from N(:5, :16), high loadings = uniform(:65, :95), NEO
intercorrelations are taken from the German NEO-PI-R. Gray shaded areas are approximate
confidence intervals.

   Next, we turn our attention to the estimates of intertrait correlations (Figure 3).
When mixed keyed items are used, the estimates are very accurate for both T-IRT
and the standard scoring procedure. Only for five traits does the accuracy seems to
be imperfect but still satisfactory. For equally keyed items, we see a clear bias in the
estimation of intertrait correlations. The pattern of results is similar for T-IRT and
standard scores. It decreases drastically between five and 10 traits and is around .1 or
smaller if 10 or more traits are measured. For classical scores, the pattern does not
differ by factor loading or intercorrelation. T-IRT models do not benefit from the
incorporation of factor loadings. In the condition of high factor loadings, T-IRT does
not recover the covariance structure better than the classical scoring approach, neither
for zero intercorrelations nor for those from the NEO-PI-R. The sample size does not
influence the bias considerably.
   Finally, Figure 4 shows the correlation of true and estimated person mean scores
for all conditions. Both scoring methods yield good results for mixed keyed items.
This is true for the whole range of sample sizes and trait numbers considered here.
Based on the correlation of true and estimated person means, the person parameter
estimates seem to have a normative quality. A perfect correspondence between true
scores and estimates is not reached, but this could be expected due to the unreliabil-
ity of the trait estimates. In contrast, for equally keyed items, the means of true and
estimated parameters based on the standard scoring do not correlate. To be precise,
Schulte et al.                                                                               17




Figure 3. Bias of intertrait correlations. Realistic loadings = factor loadings from N(:5, :16),
high loadings = uniform(:65, :95), NEO intercorrelations are taken from the German NEO-PI-
R. Gray shaded areas are approximate confidence intervals.




Figure 4. Correlation of true and estimated person means. Realistic loadings = factor
loadings from N(:5, :16), high loadings = uniform(:65, :95), NEO intercorrelations are taken
from the German NEO-PI-R. Gray shaded areas are approximate confidence intervals.
18                                      Educational and Psychological Measurement 00(0)


the correlation is undefined due to the zero variance, and we set it to zero for illustra-
tional purposes demonstrating the ipsative nature of these measures. For T-IRT esti-
mates, the correlations are also low when traits are not intercorrelated. In the
respective conditions, the increase of trait numbers does not exhibit any positive
effect. In contrast, under realistic intercorrelations, correlations between true person
means and T-IRT person means are higher and increase as the number of measured
traits goes up. Yet the absolute levels remain below those achievable with mixed
keyed items. Even under optimal conditions (high loadings and 30 traits), the correla-
tion does not exceed .85. In comparison, the conditions with mixed keyed items
show that the variation in the estimated person means of equally keyed items that is
not explained by the true person means cannot exclusively be attributed to the
unreliability of trait scores. Instead, the low correlation of true and estimated person
means for equally keyed items is an indicator of partial ipsativity. The ipsativity ten-
dency seems to be more pronounced in very small sample sizes (i.e., if N = 100).
    In our simulations, the factor loadings (i.e., their size, not their sign) were ran-
domly drawn and randomly combined into blocks. A reviewer recommended to
improve reliability by optimizing the combination of items by maximizing squared
difference of factor loadings within each block. We tried this on a sample of our
simulation conditions and could not observe any improvement. To ensure that higher
numbers of trials would not change the results, we also computed the most relevant
conditions (realistic factor loadings, realistic inter-correlations, equally-keyed items)
again with 120 instead of 12 trials per condition. The results did not change notably
due to the increase of the trial number. The analysis scripts and results for both addi-
tional analyses can be found in the OSF (https://osf.io/t6krs/)

Discussion
The aim of this study was to determine the minimal number of traits necessary to
obtain reliable and nonipsative (i.e., normative) T-IRT person parameter estimates.
Additionally, we compared T-IRT scores with those from the classical scoring method
and investigated the influence of the sample size and factor loadings on the estimates.

Properties of T-IRT Scores
Results show that the excellent reliabilities for 30 traits observed in Bürkner et al.
(2019) are limited to questionnaires with high factor loadings used in those simula-
tions. If factor loadings are more realistic, reliability estimates are less than .80, and
confidence intervals for real-world test scores cover wide parts of the population. For
tests with equally keyed items, the reliability drops drastically, even in conditions
with high factor loadings if less than 10 traits are measured.
   Further, our results indicate that estimates remain partially ipsative when equally
keyed items are used. The negative bias of intercorrelations observed in our simula-
tions is a typical property of ipsative questionnaires (Guilford, 1952; Hicks, 1970).
Schulte et al.                                                                        19


The low correlations of true and estimated person means when items are equally
keyed compared with conditions with unequally keyed items also point to the ipsative
nature of these scores. Normative information in the factor scores seems to originate
primarily from the incorporation of trait intercorrelations into the model, and to a far
lesser extent, from the free variation of factor loadings. If person parameters remain
partially ipsative, this raises doubts about many of the validity estimates reported for
T-IRT. This is because the sum of the covariance terms obtained between a specified
criterion and a set of fully ipsative variables is zero (Clemans, 1966; Hicks, 1970).
Consequently, fully ipsative measures cannot be interpreted regularly and compared
with validity estimates from normative measures. T-IRT estimates are not completely
ipsative, but their correlation with external criteria might still be biased due to their
partially ipsative nature. The published validity estimates for T-IRT estimates are
typically comparable with rating scales (Anguiano-Carrasco et al., 2015; Brown &
Maydeu-Olivares, 2013; Lee et al., 2018; Watrin et al., 2019; Wetzel & Frick, 2019).
However, when effect sizes in favor of one method are small, even limited bias can
change the preference of one method over the other.
    The sample size had little effect on the properties of T-IRT models, at least within
the simulated range. Only in some conditions did model properties improve slightly
between N = 100 and N = 300. Thus, the sample size at which additional persons do
not improve model estimates lies between 100 and 300. Any further increase was
without noteworthy effect.


Comparison Between T-IRT and Traditional Scoring
Comparing T-IRT with classical scoring procedures, T-IRT yields equal or better
results. The measurement precision is typically higher, and under realistic conditions
simulated here, the intercorrelational bias is lower. Most important, T-IRT allows for
less ipsative person parameter estimates when items are equally keyed. However, if
the number of measured traits is low (e.g., 5 in our simulations), the RMSE of both
methods is comparable, which helps explain the set of validation studies that do not
favor T-IRT when compared with classical scorings (Fisher et al., 2019; Lee et al.,
2018; Walton et al., 2019; Wetzel, Roberts, et al., 2016).
    In the past, some researchers have claimed that T-IRT solves the problem of ipsativ-
ity and suggested the use of mixed keyed items at the same time. Against the back-
ground of our results, this seems implausible. Not only do mixed keyed items serve as a
backdoor that reintroduces faking options into the FC format but also, when factor load-
ings are mixed (i.e., half negatively) keyed, the intercorrelational bias is similar (low
loadings) or equal (high loadings) for T-IRT and classical scores. Besides that, true and
T-IRT-based person means correlate much more weakly for equally keyed items than
for unequally keyed ones, pointing out the (partially) ipsative nature of these scores.
Still, practitioners for whom the much more complicated T-IRT method is not a hurdle
might benefit from the moderate but consistent reliability increase of T-IRT as com-
pared with classical scorings when a high number of traits is measured.
20                                      Educational and Psychological Measurement 00(0)


    In comparison with earlier simulations on the standard scoring technique
(Bartram, 1996; Saville & Willson, 1991), we found similar or lower reliabilities.
One study found a slightly higher reliability of .92 for 32 traits, and these dropped on
a still remarkable level of .79 for seven uncorrelated traits (squared values from
Table 3 in Saville & Willson, 1991). Definite conclusions about the reasons for the
disparate results cannot be drawn, as conditions do not match on more than one vari-
able and the data generation processes differ drastically between the studies.
Nonetheless, we assume the main reasons to be the very high correlations of .9
among items measuring the same trait or the uniform distribution of true scores used
by Saville and Willson (1991), or a combination of both.
    In a second simulation (Bartram, 1996), normally distributed normative scores
were correlated with ipsative scores derived from normative scores by subtracting the
mean for each person over all scales for each of the scale scores. Results suggested
that normative and ipsative scores correlate highly when scales are independent of
each other (r = :96 for 12 traits and :98 for 30 traits). For moderate correlations of :3
and high numbers of traits, the correlation was still considerable (r = :81 for 12 traits
and :82 for 30 traits). Further, the authors introduced a formula which derives reliabil-
ities of ipsative scales from the reliability of their normative counterparts (Bartram,
1996, Equation 10). They conclude that under some circumstances, ipsatized scales
can be reasonably reliable. Based on our simulations, this conclusion can be general-
ized to our method of ipsatization, that is, direct ipsative measures derived from FC
questionnaires. However, our results show that under the realistic conditions simu-
lated here – especially when factor loadings drop to a typical level – the measurement
precision of the standard scoring method falls off notably and does not meet accepted
standards.


Practical Implications
Our results raise doubts about whether high psychometric standards can be met under
realistic conditions with T-IRT. When factor loadings are not extraordinarily high,
reliability estimates are below .80 and, therefore, are too low for individual diagnos-
tic purposes in high-stakes situations. Test developers still considering the use of the
technique should note that the estimate quality drops off notably if few (i.e., five)
traits are measured.
    Some test developers might consider the development of high-dimensional ques-
tionnaires with items showing very high factor loadings. To reach the necessary lev-
els of factor loadings, the measured constructs would have to be extremely
homogeneous, allowing only for the prediction of very specific criteria. In contrast,
the predictive validity for broad constructs would be limited. Besides that, the use of
questionnaires with an excessive number of scales for personnel selection has been
criticized, as they are unlikely to be empirically independent and do not necessarily
predict unique, meaningful proportions of employee job performance (Meade, 2004).
Schulte et al.                                                                       21


   Empirically, most personality questionnaires form a factor structure of about five
distinct dimensions (Goldberg, 1993). The five-factor model, however, comprises
personality facets that are too heterogeneous to be covered by items with extremely
high loadings. Such high loadings can only be achieved by extremely similar items,
but these are inadequate as content-valid operationalizations of broad constructs.
What remains as a strategy for test development is the use of mixed keyed items.
From a practical point of view, it seems to be a paradox to develop an FC question-
naire with item pairs that might reintroduce the possibility of faking, which is likely
the case when one item (i.e., the one with the negative factor loading) represents the
undesired end of the trait continuum.
   In contrast, the measurement precision of T-IRT scores based on equally keyed
items with realistic factor loadings and intercorrelations is weak. Even when a very
high number of traits is measured, the confidence intervals of individuals’ trait scores
are very wide. Given that in applied contexts the reliability is further diminished by
additional factors like fatigue and distraction of respondents, we would refrain from
the development of such a questionnaire.

Limitations
Despite our extensive simulations, some limitations need to be mentioned. First,
some factors influencing the model accuracy were not varied but held constant. In
particular, this affected the block size (three items per block), the response format
(RANK), and the number of blocks per trait (nine in these simulations). However,
higher block sizes question the appropriateness of the theoretical assumption that
responses can be described by the Law of Comparative Judgment (Thurstone, 1927)
adequately. The RANK format is the optimal response format for FC items because
it generates the highest amount of information (Hontangas et al., 2015). The number
of blocks per trait has a small but relevant influence on the precision of estimates
(Bürkner et al., 2019), but for high-dimensional questionnaires this number cannot
be increased arbitrarily due to time limitations. This study was designed to determine
the best performance of T-IRT models that is possible under realistic conditions.
Therefore, we did not apply a condition with exclusively positive intercorrelations
(Bürkner et al., 2019) and lower proportions of mixed keyed items, because it can be
assumed that this would lead to even lower measurement precisions.
    Second, there are other item configurations that we have not examined. These
include unidimensional comparisons and the insertion of distractor items. It cannot
be ruled out that these will lead to improvements, as they may contain more informa-
tion on absolute trait standing.
    Third, we assumed that high scores on all measured traits are ideal. In practice,
there are cases where some traits are considered more important than others (e.g., in
a selection scenario) or medium trait level (e.g., for agreeableness) are desirable. Yet
we argue that when test-takers can identify less attractive traits, any FC technique is
pointless because highly attractive and less attractive items will be compared.
Furthermore, scales for which medium values are desired are not optimally modelled
22                                      Educational and Psychological Measurement 00(0)


by the Thurstonian IRT models. If we understand the utility of an item in a faking-
prone context as a function of a person’s true value and the item’s social desirability,
and medium scores are desirable, the utility will have a peak in the middle of the
latent scale. T-IRT models are based on the dominance approach that assumes true
trait values and latent utilities to be linearly related, and therefore, cannot model such
situations adequately. Ideal point models (Coombs, 1960; Stark et al., 2005) might
be more appropriate in such a scenario.
    Fourth, our results are based on 12 trials per simulation condition. The reason for
this comparably low number is that the model estimation in our simulation is compu-
tationally very intensive and requires several days per model for the larger models.
However, the low dispersion within conditions led us to assume that more trials would
not have changed the results substantially (Bürkner et al., 2019). In the conditions for
which we computed 120 trials, we also did not see any relevant differences between
the results of 12 and 120 trials (see supplementary material on https://osf.io/zk79h/).

Future Research
Based on our results, it seems to be unlikely to derive precise and normative person
parameter estimates from a faking-resistant FC test using either classical or T-IRT
methods to score responses. However, other scoring approaches have been proposed
(for an overview, see Brown, 2016). Even though there is a certain likelihood that all
scoring methods suffer from the limited information FC responses provide on the
absolute trait standing, better performance of other models should not be ruled out.
One alternative in this context is the multi-unidimensional pairwise preference model
(Stark et al., 2005), which is based on an ideal point approach (Coombs, 1960). On
the one hand, among the available alternatives this model has comparatively better
chances to lead to improvements, because it is less similar to the T-IRT model than
others. However, the ideal point parameter might play a similar problematic role for
the identification of the scale origin as the factor loadings in T-IRT models (Brown,
2016, Equation 44) and probably cannot be disregarded with respect to matching for
social desirability either.
    Another way to improve the measurement precision of FC questions are graded
paired comparisons. This format uses a rating scale between two items. While this
drastically increases the information generated with each item, it also allows for
response biases such as extremity and midpoint tendency. Regarding its faking resis-
tance, this format is promising, because it maintains the mechanism that not all
attractive items can be fully endorsed. An ordinal scoring method for this kind of
questionnaire data has been introduced recently (Brown & Maydeu-Olivares, 2018).
    An alternative scoring approach should be validated appropriately. The minimum
requirements for a convincing validation study would be (a) a questionnaire that is
faking resistant what should at least be ensured by employing a reasonable matching
method that allows for the desirability of items within each block to be equal. Such a
questionnaire would have to correlate (b) with a relevant criterion not measured with
FC or rating scales and (c) the validity estimates should be higher for T-IRT FC scales
Schulte et al.                                                                                  23


than for the rating version of that questionnaire and (d) other FC scoring methods in
(e) a high-stakes situation. Until now, no such validation attempt has been published.


Conclusion
Taken together, our results show that T-IRT models represent significant progress in
the scoring of responses to FC tests. They perform equally well or better than the tra-
ditional scoring technique. This is not surprising, given that traditional scoring meth-
ods do not account for varying factor loadings and intertrait correlations. While the
improvements in measurement properties are often gradual, the most remarkable
enhancement relates to the ipsativity of scores from equally keyed blocks measuring
intercorrelated traits. Under these conditions, classical scores are completely ipsative,
whereas T-IRT scores incorporate a considerable amount of nonipsative variance,
especially if the number of measured traits is high.
    Nonetheless, for excellent measurement precision as is required in high-stakes
situations for decisions on the individual level, T-IRT models can only be applied for
questionnaires with very high factor loadings and mixed keyed items within blocks.
As FC tests are hardly faking resistant if mixed keyed items are used, this condition
is not consistent with the motivation that led to the development and application of
FC questionnaires in the first place. Another approach to construct a T-IRT analyzed
FC questionnaire would be to measure 10 or more dimensions using items with very
high factor loadings. In practice, this is not the typical condition under which psycho-
metric tests can be developed. Additionally, our results suggest that scores remain
partially ipsative in this scenario.

Acknowledgments
The authors want to express their special gratitude to Fritz Ostendorf who liberally shared his
norming sample of the NEO-PI-R. We also thank the high-performance computing team at the
Center of Information Processing (ZIV, Münster University) for their helpful technical support.
To conduct the presented analyses and create this article, we used the programming language
R (R Core Team, 2018) through the interface RStudio (RStudio Team, 2018). Further, the fol-
lowing R packages were crucial (in alphabetical order): ggplot2 (Wickham, 2016), knitr (Xie,
2014), papaja (Aust & Barth, 2018), rmarkdown (Allaire et al., 2018), rstan (Carpenter et al.,
2017), thurstonianIRT (Bürkner, 2019), and tidyverse (Wickham, 2017).


Declaration of Conflicting Interests
The author(s) declared no potential conflicts of interest with respect to the research, authorship,
and/or publication of this article.


Funding
The author(s) received no financial support for the research, authorship, and/or publication of
this article.
24                                         Educational and Psychological Measurement 00(0)


ORCID iDs
Niklas Schulte     https://orcid.org/0000-0001-8915-7503
Paul-Christian Bürkner     https://orcid.org/0000-0001-5765-8995


References
Allaire, J., Xie, Y., McPherson, J., Luraschi, J., Ushey, K., Atkins, A., Wickham, H., Cheng,
    J., Chang, W., & Iannone, R. (2018). Rmarkdown: Dynamic documents for R. https://
    CRAN.R-project.org/package=rmarkdown
Anguiano-Carrasco, C., MacCann, C., Geiger, M., Seybert, J. M., & Roberts, R. D. (2015).
    Development of a forced-choice measure of typical-performance emotional intelligence.
    Journal of Psychoeducational Assessment, 33(1), 83-97. https://doi.org/10.1177/073428
    2914550387
Aust, F., & Barth, M. (2018). papaja: Create APA manuscripts with R Markdown. https://
    github.com/crsh/papaja
Baron, H. (1996). Strengths and limitations of ipsative measurement. Journal of Occupational
    and Organizational Psychology, 69(1), 49-56. https://doi.org/10.1111/j.2044-8325.1996.
    tb00599.x
Bartram, D. (1996). The relationship between ipsatized and normative measures of
    personality. Journal of Occupational and Organizational Psychology, 69(1), 25-39. https:
    //doi.org/10.1111/j.2044-8325.1996.tb00597.x
Brown, A. (2016). Item response models for forced-choice questionnaires: A common
    framework. Psychometrika, 81(1), 135-160. https://doi.org/10.1007/s11336-014-9434-9
Brown, A., & Bartram, D. (2011). OPQ32r technical manual. SHL.
Brown, A., & Bartram, D. (2013). The occupational personality questionnaire revolution:
    Applying item response theory to questionnaire design and scoring. http://
    www.humandevelopmentsolutions.com/views/archives/pdf/White-Paper-OPQ32r.pdf
Brown, A., Inceoglu, I., & Lin, Y. (2017). Preventing rater biases in 360-degree feedback by
    forcing choice. Organizational Research Methods, 20(1), 121-148. https://doi.org/
    10.1177/1094428116668036
Brown, A., & Maydeu-Olivares, A. (2011). Item response modeling of forced-choice
    questionnaires. Educational and Psychological Measurement, 71(3), 460-502. https://doi.
    org/10.1177/0013164410375112
Brown, A., & Maydeu-Olivares, A. (2012). Fitting a Thurstonian IRT model to forced-choice
    data using Mplus. Behavior Research Methods, 44(4), 1135-1147. https://doi.org/
    10.3758/s13428-012-0217-x
Brown, A., & Maydeu-Olivares, A. (2013). How IRT can solve problems of ipsative data in
    forced-choice questionnaires. Psychological Methods, 18(1), 36-52. https://doi.org/
    10.1037/a0030641
Brown, A., & Maydeu-Olivares, A. (2018). Ordinal factor analysis of graded-preference
    questionnaire data. Structural Equation Modeling, 25(4), 516-529. https://doi.org/
    10.1080/10705511.2017.1392247
Bürkner, P.-C. (2019). thurstonianIRT: Thurstonian IRT models in R (R package Version 0.8).
    https://doi.org/10.21105/joss.01662
Bürkner, P.-C., Schulte, N., & Holling, H. (2019). On the statistical and practical limitations
    of Thurstonian IRT models. Educational and Psychological Measurement, 79(5), 827-854.
    https://doi.org/10.1177/0013164419832063
Schulte et al.                                                                               25


Cao, M., & Drasgow, F. (2019). Does forcing reduce faking? A meta-analytic review of
   forced-choice personality measures in high-stakes situations. Journal of Applied
   Psychology, 104(11), 1347-1368. https://doi.org/10.1037/apl0000414
Carpenter, B., Gelman, A., Hoffman, M., Lee, D., Goodrich, B., Betancourt, M., Guo, J., Li,
   P., & Ridell, A. (2017). Stan: A probabilistic programming language. Journal of Statistical
   Software, 76(1). https://doi.org/10.18637/jss.v076.i01
Cattell, R. B. (1944). Psychological measurement: Normative, ipsative, interactive.
   Psychological Review, 51(5), 292-303. https://doi.org/10.1037/h0057299
Christiansen, N. D., Burns, G. N., & Montgomery, G. E. (2005). Reconsidering forced-choice
   item formats for applicant personality assessment. Human Performance, 18(3), 267-307.
   https://doi.org/10.1207/s15327043hup1803_4
Clemans, W. V. (1966). An analytical and empirical examination of some properties of
   ipsative measures (Psychometrika Monograph No. 14). Psychometric Society. http://
   www.psychometrika.org/journal/online/MN14.pdf
Coombs, C. H. (1960). A theory of data. Psychological Review, 67(3), 143-159. https:
   //doi.org/10.1037/h0047773
Cornwell, J. M., & Dunlap, W. P. (1994). On the questionable soundness of factoring ipsative
   data: A response to Saville & Willson (1991). Journal of Occupational and Organizational
   Psychology, 67(2), 89-100. https://doi.org/10.1111/j.2044-8325.1994.tb00553.x
Costa, P. T., & McCrae, R. R. (1992). NEO-PI-R professional manual. Psychological
   Assessment Resources.
Credé, M., Bashshur, M., & Niehorster, S. (2010). Reference group effects in the measurement
   of personality and attitudes. Journal of Personality Assessment, 92(5), 390-399. https:
   //doi.org/10.1080/00223891.2010.497393
Fisher, P. A., Robie, C., Christiansen, N. D., Speer, A. B., & Schneider, L. (2019). Criterion-
   related validity of forced-choice personality measures: A cautionary note regarding
   Thurstonian IRT versus classical test theory scoring. Personnel Assessment and Decisions,
   5(1). https://doi.org/10.25035/pad.2019.01.003
Goldberg, L. R. (1993). The structure of phenotypic personality traits. American Psychologist,
   48(1), 26-34. https://doi.org/10.1037/0003-066X.48.1.26
Guenole, N., Brown, A., & Cooper, A. J. (2018). Forced-choice assessment of work-related
   maladaptive personality traits: Preliminary evidence from an application of Thurstonian
   item        response       modeling.      Assessment,       25(4),     513-526.        https:
   //doi.org/10.1177/1073191116641181
Guilford, J. P. (1952). When not to factor analyze. Psychological Bulletin, 49(1), 26-37. https:
   //doi.org/10.1037/h0054935
He, J., Bartram, D., Inceoglu, I., & van de Vijver, F. J. R. (2014). Response styles and
   personality traits: A multilevel analysis. Journal of Cross-Cultural Psychology, 45(7),
   1028-1045. https://doi.org/10.1177/0022022114534773
Hicks, L. E. (1970). Some properties of ipsative, normative, and forced-choice normative
   measures. Psychological Bulletin, 74(3), 167-184. https://doi.org/10.1037/h0029780
Hontangas, P. M., Torre, J. de la, Ponsoda, V., Leenen, I., Morillo, D., & Abad, F. J. (2015).
   Comparing traditional and IRT scoring of forced-choice tests. Applied Psychological
   Measurement, 39(8), 598-612. https://doi.org/10.1177/0146621615585851
Johnson, C. E., Wood, R., & Blinkhorn, S. F. (1988). Spuriouser and spuriouser: The use of
   ipsative personality tests. Journal of Occupational Psychology, 61(2), 153-162. https:
   //doi.org/10.1111/j.2044-8325.1988.tb00279.x
26                                       Educational and Psychological Measurement 00(0)


Johnson, T., Kulesa, P., Cho, Y. I., & Shavitt, S. (2005). The relation between culture and
   response styles: Evidence from 19 countries. Journal of Cross-Cultural Psychology, 36(2),
   264-277. https://doi.org/10.1177/0022022104272905
Joubert, T., Inceoglu, I., Bartram, D., Dowdeswell, K., & Lin, Y. (2015). A comparison of the
   psychometric properties of the forced choice and Likert scale versions of a personality
   instrument. International Journal of Selection and Assessment, 23(1), 92-97. https:
   //doi.org/10.1111/ijsa.12098
Lee, P., Joo, S.-H., & Lee, S. (2019). Examining stability of personality profile solutions
   between Likert-type and multidimensional forced choice measure. Personality and
   Individual Differences, 142(1), 13-20. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.paid.2019.01.022
Lee, P., Lee, S., & Stark, S. (2018). Examining validity evidence for multidimensional forced
   choice measures with different scoring approaches. Personality and Individual Differences,
   123, 229-235. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.paid.2017.11.031
Lewis, J. L. (2015). Korn ferry four dimensional executive assessment. http://
   static.kornferry.com/media/sidebar_downloads/KF4D_Executive_Manual_FINAL.pdf
Lin, Y., & Brown, A. (2017). Influence of context on item parameters in forced-choice
   personality assessments. Educational and Psychological Measurement, 77(3), 389-414.
   https://doi.org/10.1177/0013164416646162
Maydeu-Olivares, A., & Böckenholt, U. (2005). Structural equation modeling of paired-
   comparison and ranking data. Psychological Methods, 10(3), 285-304. https:
   //doi.org/10.1037/1082-989X.10.3.285
Meade, A. W. (2004). Psychometric problems and issues involved with creating and using
   ipsative measures for selection. Journal of Occupational and Organizational Psychology,
   77(4), 531-552. https://doi.org/10.1348/0963179042596504
Merk, J., Schlotz, W., & Falter, T. (2017). The Motivational Value Systems Questionnaire
   (MVSQ): Psychometric analysis using a forced choice Thurstonian IRT model. Frontiers
   in Psychology, 8, Article 1626. https://doi.org/10.3389/fpsyg.2017.01626
Muthén, L., & Muthén, B. (2015). Mplus. The comprehensive modelling program for applied
   researchers: User’s guide, 5. Muthén & Muthén.
Ostendorf, F., & Angleitner, A. (2004). NEO-PI-R: Neo-persönlichkeitsinventar nach Costa
   und McCrae [NEO-PI-R: NEO personality inventory after Costa und McCrae]. Hogrefe.
Parvin, S., & Wang, P. (2014). Assessing best-worst scaling in consumer value research. In S.
   Rundle-Thiele, K. Kubacki, & D. Arli (Eds.), Proceedings of Australian and New Zealand
   Marketing Academy Conference 2014 (pp. 780-786). Griffith University, ANZMAC. http://
   opus.lib.uts.edu.au/bitstream/10453/30524/1/Parvin-Wang-AssessingBestWorst%20-
   %20ANZMAC%202014%20Upload.pdf
Paulhus, D. L., & Jones, D. N. (2014). Measurement of dark personalities. In G. J. Boyle, D.
   H. Saklosfske, & G. Matthews (Eds.), Measures of personality and social psychological
   constructs (pp. 562-594). Academic Press. https://doi.org/10.1016/B978-0-12-386915-
   9.00020-6
Paulhus, D. L., & Vazire, S. (2007). The self-report method. In R. W. Robins, R. C. Fraley, &
   R. F. Krueger (Eds.), Handbook of research methods in personality psychology (pp. 224-
   239). Guilford.
R Core Team. (2018). R: A language and environment for statistical computing. R Foundation
   for Statistical Computing. https://www.R-project.org/
Rosseel, Y. (2012). lavaan: An R package for structural equation modeling. Journal of
   Statistical Software, 48(2), 1-36. https://doi.org/10.18637/jss.v048.i02
Schulte et al.                                                                             27


RStudio Team. (2018). RStudio: Integrated development for R. RStudio. http://www.rstudio.
   com
Sass, R., Frick, S., Reips, U.-D., & Wetzel, E. (2018). Taking the test taker’s perspective:
   Response process and test motivation in multidimensional forced-choice versus rating scale
   instruments. Assessment, 27(3), 572-584. https://doi.org/10.1177/1073191118762049
Saville, P., Holdsworth, R., Nyfield, G., Cramp, L., & Maybey, W. (1992). Occupational
   personality questionnaire manual. SHL.
Saville, P., & Willson, E. (1991). The reliability and validity of normative and ipsative
   approaches in the measurement of personality. Journal of Occupational Psychology, 64(3),
   219-238. https://doi.org/10.1111/j.2044-8325.1991.tb00556.x
Stark, S., Chernyshenko, O. S., & Drasgow, F. (2005). An IRT approach to constructing and
   scoring pairwise preference items involving stimuli on different dimensions: The multi-
   unidimensional pairwise-preference model. Applied Psychological Measurement, 29(3),
   184-203. https://doi.org/10.1177/0146621604273988
Stewart, G. L., Darnold, T. C., Zimmerman, R. D., Parks, L., & Dustin, S. L. (2010). Exploring
   how response distortion of personality measures affects individuals. Personality and
   Individual Differences, 49(6), 622-628. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.paid.2010.05.035
Thurstone, L. L. (1927). A law of comparative judgment. Psychological Review, 34(4),
   273-286. https://doi.org/10.1037/h0070288
van Eijnatten, F. M., van der Ark, L. A., & Holloway, S. S. (2015). Ipsative measurement and
   the analysis of organizational values: An alternative approach for data analysis. Quality &
   Quantity: International Journal of Methodology, 49(2), 559-579. https://doi.org/10.1007/
   s11135-014-0009-8
Walton, K. E., Cherkasova, L., & Roberts, R. D. (2019). On the validity of forced choice
   scores derived from the Thurstonian item response theory model. Assessment, 27(4),
   706-718. https://doi.org/10.1177/1073191119843585
Wang, W.-C., Qiu, X.-L., Chen, C.-W., Ro, S., & Jin, K.-Y. (2017). Item response theory
   models for ipsative tests with multidimensional pairwise comparison items. Applied
   Psychological Measurement, 41(8), 600-613. https://doi.org/10.1177/0146621617703183
Watrin, L., Geiger, M., Spengler, M., & Wilhelm, O. (2019). Forced-choice versus Likert
   responses on an occupational big five questionnaire. Journal of Individual Differences,
   40(3). https://doi.org/10.1027/1614-0001/a000285
Wetzel, E., Böhnke, J. R., & Brown, A. (2016). Response biases. In F. T. L. Leong, D.
   Bartram, F. M. Cheung, K. F. Geisinger, & D. Iliescu (Eds.), The ITC international
   handbook of testing and assessment (pp. 349-363). Oxford University Press.
Wetzel, E., & Frick, S. (2019). Comparing the validity of trait estimates from the
   multidimensional forced-choice format and the rating scale format. Psychological
   Assessment. https://doi.org/10.31234/osf.io/hta6w
Wetzel, E., & Greiff, S. (2018). The world beyond rating scales: Why we should think more
   carefully about the response format in questionnaires. European Journal of Psychological
   Assessment, 34(1), 1-5. https://doi.org/10.1027/1015-5759/a000469
Wetzel, E., Roberts, B. W., Fraley, R. C., & Brown, A. (2016). Equivalence of narcissistic
   personality inventory constructs and correlates across scoring approaches and response
   formats. Journal of Research in Personality, 61, 87-98. https://doi.org/10.1016/
   j.jrp.2015.12.002
Wickham, H. (2016). ggplot2: Elegant graphics for data analysis. Springer-Verlag. https://
   ggplot2.tidyverse.org/
28                                       Educational and Psychological Measurement 00(0)


Wickham, H. (2017). Tidyverse: Easily install and load the ‘‘tidyverse.’’ https://CRAN.R-
   project.org/package=tidyverse
Xiao, Y., Liu, H., & Li, H. (2017). Integration of the forced-choice questionnaire and the
   Likert scale: A simulation study. Frontiers in Psychology, 8, Article 806. https:
   //doi.org/10.3389/fpsyg.2017.00806
Xie, Y. (2014). Knitr: A comprehensive tool for reproducible research in R. In V. Stodden, F.
   Leisch, & R. D. Peng (Eds.), Implementing reproducible research (pp. 3-22). CRC Press.
Young, A. L. (2018). Faking resistance of a forced-choice measure of the dark triad
   [Unpublished doctoral dissertation]. North Carolina State University. https://
   repository.lib.ncsu.edu/bitstream/handle/1840.20/35649/etd.pdf?sequence=1
