Journal of Personality and Social Psychology
1974, Vol. 30, No. 4, 526-537

SELF-MONITORING OF EXPRESSIVE BEHAVIOR1
MARK SNYDER2
University of Minnesota
A social psychological construct of self-monitoring (self-observation and
self-control guided by situational cues to social appropriateness) of expressive
behavior and self-presentation was proposed. An internally consistent, temporally stable self-report measure of individual differences in self-monitoring was
constructed. Four converging laboratory and field studies of peer perception
ratings, criterion group membership, self-control of facial and vocal emotional
expressive behavior, and attention to normative social comparison information
were conducted to demonstrate the convergent and discriminant validity of
the Self-Monitoring Scale (SM). The use of SM to investigate hypotheses
concerning consistency in expression across situations and between channels of
expressive behavior was discussed.

as a pipeline or radarscope to one's true inner
"self" (e.g., Freud, 1959). Although nonverbal behavior may often escape voluntary
attempts at censorship (Ekman & Friesen,
1969), there have been numerous demonstrations that individuals can voluntarily express
various emotions with their vocal and/or
facial expressive behavior in such a way that
their expressive behavior can be accurately
interpreted by observers (e.g., Davitz, 1964).
In fact, some social observers have proposed
that the ability to manage and control expressive presentation is a prerequisite to effective social and interpersonal functioning.
Thus Goffman (1955) has likened social interaction to a theatrical performance or
"line" of verbal and nonverbal self-expressive
acts which are managed to keep one's line
1
This report is based on a doctoral dissertation appropriate to the current situation. Such
submitted to Stanford University. The research was self-management requires a repertoire of
supported in part by National Institute of Mental
Health Training Grant MH-12283 in Social Psy- face-saving devices, an awareness of the inchology and in part by a Canada Council Doctoral terpretations which others place on one's acts,
Fellowship. The author thanks Daryl J. Bern, chair- a desire to maintain social approval, and the
man of the dissertation committee, for his encour- willingness to use this repertoire of impresagement and intelligent counsel throughout the conceptual, empirical, and literary phases of the disser- sion management tactics. Within the more
tation; and J. Merrill Carlsmith, Lee D. Ross, and restricted domain of facial expressions of
Philip G. Zimbardo, members of the committee, for emotional affect, Ekman (1971) has suggested
their interest, attention, and suggestions at various that individuals typically exercise control
stages of the research. John Grether, Tom Price, over their facial expressions to intensify, deChris Ryan, Anne Coffey, Sheridan Crawford, Jul'.e
Steinmetz, Mike Cochran, Kris Keller, Richard intensify, neutralize, or mask the expression
Quan, and Mike Boyle provided valuable and of a felt affect, according to various norms of
creative assistance in conducting the experiments and social performance.
contributed their insights into self-monitoring.
There are, however, striking and important
2
Requests for reprints should be sent to Mark
individual
differences in the extent to which
Snyder, Laboratory for Research in Social Relations,
Department of Psychology, University of Minne- individuals can and do monitor their selfsota, Minneapolis, Minnesota 55455.
presentation, expressive behavior, and non526
A common observation in literature and
cultural folklore has been that certain nonlanguage behaviors, such as voice quality,
body motion, touch, and the use of personal
space appear to play a prominent role in
communication. Furthermore, laboratory and
field research clearly indicates that much information about a person's affective states,
status and attitude, cooperative and competitive nature of social interaction, and interpersonal intimacy is expressed and accurately
communicated to others in nonverbal expressive behavior (e.g., Ekman, 1971; Hall, 1966;
Mehrabian, 1969; Sommer, 1969).
Much interest in nonverbal expressive behavior stems from a belief that it may not be
under voluntary control and might function

SELF-MONITORING OF EXPRESSIVE BEHAVIOR
verbal affective display. Clearly, professional
stage actors can do what I cannot. Politicians
have long known how important it is to wear
the right face for the right constituency. LaGuardia learned the expressive repertoires of
several different cultures in New York and
became "chameleon-like" the son of whatever people he was facing. Yet little research
has directly concerned such individual differences in the self-control of expressive behavior. At best, some dispositional correlates
of spontaneous and natural expression of emotion have been reported (e.g., Buck, Savin,
Miller, & Caul, 1972; Davitz, 1964).
A Concept of Self-Monitoring of
Expressive Behavior
How might individual differences in the
self-control of expressive behavior arise? What
might be the developmental, historical, and
current motivational origins of self-control
ability and performance? Perhaps some individuals have learned that their affective experience and expression are either socially
inappropriate or lacking. Such people may
monitor (observe and control) their selfpresentation and expressive behavior. The
goals of self-monitoring may be (a) to communicate accurately one's true emotional state
by means of an intensified expressive presentation; (b) to communicate accurately an
arbitrary emotional state which need not be
congruent with actual emotional experience;
(c) to conceal adaptively an inappropriate
emotional state and appear unresponsive and
unexpressive; (d) to conceal adaptively an
inappropriate emotional state and appear to
be experiencing an appropriate one; (e) to
appear to be experiencing some emotion when
one experiences nothing and a nonresponse is
inappropriate.
An acute sensitivity to the cues in a situation which indicate what expression or selfpresentation is appropriate and what is not
is a corollary ability to self-monitoring. One
such set of cues for guiding self-monitoring
is the emotional expressive behavior of other
similar comparison persons in the same situation.
There is some evidence of an acute version
of this process. When persons are made un-

527

certain of their emotional reactions, they look
to the behavior of others for cues to define
their emotional states and model the emotional expressive behavior of others in the
same situation who appear to be behaving
appropriately (Schachter & Singer, 1962).
On the other hand, persons who have not
learned a concern for appropriateness of their
self-presentation would not have such welldeveloped self-monitoring skills and would not
be so vigilant to social comparison information about appropriate patterns of expression
and experience. This is not to say that they
are not emotionally expressive or even that
they are less so than those who monitor their
presentation. Rather, their self-presentation
and expressive behavior seem, in a functional
sense, to be controlled from within by their
affective states (they express it as they feel
it) rather than monitored, controlled, and
molded to fit the situation.
Self-Monitoring and Consistency in
Expression: Between Modalities and
across Situations
Do people, as Freud (1959) believed, say
one thing with their lips and another with
their fingertips? More specifically, what governs the consistency between expression in
different channels of expression, such as vocal
and facial, and the consistency between nonverbal and verbal expression? The self-monitoring approach provides one perspective on
differences and consistencies across channels
of expression, including verbal self-presentation.
It is likely that when one is monitoring,
various channels are monitored differentially,
and perhaps some forgotten. Thus, what may
be communicated by one channel may differ
from what is communicated by another. For
example, I may cover my sadness by putting
on a happy face but forget to use a happy
voice.
Ekman and Friesen (1969, 1972) have
demonstrated with psychiatric patients and
student nurses that in deception situations
people are more likely to monitor their facial
than body presentation, with the result that
the deception is more likely to be detected
from an examination of body cues than fa-

528

MARK SNYDER

cial cues. Thus, the information encoded in
monitored channels should differ from that
encoded in nonmonitored channels. However,
it is likely that great consistency characterizes that set of channels of expressive (verbal
or nonverbal) behaviors which are simultaneously monitored according to the same
criteria. Furthermore, self-monitored expressive behavior should vary more from situation to situation than nonmonitored expressive behavior. Self-monitoring individuals
should be most likely to monitor and control
their expression in situations which contain
reliable cues to social appropriateness. Thus,
such a person would be more likely to laugh
at a comedy when watching it with amused
peers than when watching it alone. The laughing behavior of the non-self-monitoring person should be more invariant across those two
situations and more related to how affectively
amused he himself actually is. The expressive
behavior of self-monitoring individuals should
be more reflective of an internal affect state
when it is generated in a situation with minimal incentives for, and cues to, self-monitoring.
The cross-situational variability of the selfmonitoring versus the consistency of the nonself-monitoring individuals is similar to the
"traits versus situations" issue: Is behavior
controlled by situational factors and hence
predictable from characteristics of the surrounding situation, or is it controlled by
internal states and dispositions which produce
cross-situational consistency and facilitate
prediction from characteristics of the person,
measures of internal states, or dispositions
(Mischel, 1968; Moos, 1968, 1969)? Bern
(1972) has proposed that the issue be redirected from an "either traits or situations for
all behavior of all people" debate to a search
for moderating variables which would allow
the specification for an individual of equivalence classes of situations and responses across
which he monitors his behavior with respect
to a particularly central self-concept. In these
areas he would show trait-like cross-situational and interresponse mode consistency; in
others he would not. In the domain of expressive behavior, individual differences in
self-monitoring are a moderating variable
which identifies individuals who demonstrate

or fail to demonstrate consistency across
channels of expression and between situations
differing in monitoring properties.
In Search of a Measure of Individual
Differences in Self-Monitoring
How can we capture individual differences
in self-monitoring? A review of the literature
suggests at least one currently available measure which might serve to identify individuals
who differ in self-monitoring.
The self-monitoring individual is one who,
out of a concern for social appropriateness, is
particularly sensitive to the expression and
self-presentation of others in social situations
and uses these cues as guidelines for monitoring his own self-presentation. Is there then
any difference between this person and the
individual with a high "need for approval"
as measured by the Marlowe-Crowne Social
Desirability Scale (Crowne & Marlowe,
1964)? In a wide variety of situations, individuals who have a high need for approval
give socially desirable responses. They conform more than low-need-for-approval individuals in an Asch situation; they verbally
condition better; they do not show overt
hostility toward one who has insulted and
double-crossed them; and they are less likely
to report dirty words in a perceptual defense
task (Crowne & Marlowe, 1964). All of this
would suggest that the high-need-for-approval
person is one who modifies his behavior from
situation to situation. However, other evidence
suggests that this ability to alter behavior
may be severely limited to contingencies of
social approval (Bern, 1972).
In addition, it may be only the social approval of adult experimenters which is reinforcing and sought after. In a sociometric
study, fraternity members with a high need
for approval were described by their peers as
individuals who spend most of their time
alone rather than with other people, do not
go out of their way to make friends, are not
very conversational, and do not act friendly
toward other fraternity members (study by
Stephen C. Bank, reported in Crowne & Marlowe, 1964, pp. 162-163).
In another study on verbal conditioning,
high- and low-need-for-approval subjects did
not differ in the extent to which they mod-

SELF-MONITORING OF EXPRESSIVE BEHAVIOR
eled the behavior of a peer (actually a confederate) they had previously observed perform the experimental task appropriately
(Crowne & Marlowe, 1964, pp. 61-72).
Furthermore, and particularly relevant to the
self-monitoring of expressive behavior, this
self-control ability may not extend into the
domain of expressive behavior. Zaidel and
Mehrabian (1969) reported that individuals
who scored high on the Need for Approval
Scale were actually less able to communicate
either positive or negative affect facially or
vocally than were low-need-for-approval subjects. In this experimental situation, the socially desirable response and the one which
would gain the approval of the experimenter
would clearly be the accurate expression and
communication of affect. Thus, although highneed-for-approval individuals may be motivated to modify their expressive self-presentation in order to gain approval, they may lack
the necessary self-control abilities and skills.
Self-monitoring would probably best be
measured by an instrument specifically designed to discriminate individual differences
in concern for social appropriateness, sensitivity to the expression and self-presentation
of others in social situations as cues to social
appropriateness of self-expression, and use of
these cues as guidelines for monitoring and
managing self-presentation and expressive behavior. Accordingly, an attempt was made to
transpose the self-monitoring concept into a
self-report scale which reliably and validly
measures it.
The convergence between diverse methods
of measuring self-monitoring was examined
according to the strategy of construct validation (Cronbach & Meehl, 19SS). To demonstrate discriminant validity (Campbell &
Fiske, 1959), comparisons were made between
self-monitoring and need for approval in the
prediction of each external criterion in the
validation strategy. Need for approval was
chosen for these critical comparisons for two
reasons. Its conceptual relationship to selfmonitoring has already been discussed.
Naturally, this procedure also further individuates the type of person identified by the
Need for Approval Scale. In addition, Campbell (1960) has recommended that in view of
the general response tendency of some indi-

529

viduals to describe themselves in a favorable
manner, and the close relationship between
probability of endorsement of personality
statements and their social desirability, all
tests of the voluntary self-descriptive sort
should be demonstrated to predict their criterion measures better than a measure of the
general social desirability factor.
CONSTRUCTION OF THE SELF-MONITORING
SCALE
Forty-one true-false self-descriptive statements were administered to 192 Stanford
University undergraduates. The set included
items which describe (a) concern with the
social appropriateness of one's self-presentation (e.g., "At parties and social gatherings,
I do not attempt to do or say things that
others will like"); (£) attention to social
comparison information as cues to appropriate
self-expression (e.g., "When I am uncertain
how to act in social situations, I look to the
behavior of others for cues"); (c) the ability
to control and modify one's self-presentation
and expressive behavior (e.g., "I can look
anyone in the eye and tell a lie with a
straight face [if for a right end]"); (d) the
use of this ability in particular situations
(e.g., "I may deceive people by being friendly
when I really dislike them"); and (e) the
extent to which the respondent's expressive
behavior and self-presentation is cross-situationally consistent or variable (e.g., "In different situations and with different people, I
often act like very different persons").
The individual items were scored in the
direction of high self-monitoring. For approximately half the items, agreement was
keyed as high SM; for the remainder, disagreement was keyed as high SM.
An item analysis was performed to select
items to maximize internal consistency. In
this procedure, the top and bottom thirds in
total test scores of persons were found. Then
the percentages of persons in each group who
responded in the manner keyed as high SM
were determined. Finally, the percentage in
the bottom group was subtracted from the
percentage in the top group. This difference
(D) served as an index of item validity to
discriminate total test scores (Anastasi, 1968).
D is directly proportional to the difference

530

MARK SNYDEE

between the number of "correct" and "incor- of social performance required in a wide
rect" total score discriminations made by an range of situations and who seeks social apitem. D values are not independent of item proval by becoming whatever kind of person
difficulty and are biased in favor of items of the situation requires. He is literally a chaintermediate difficulty level. D is, then, an meleon. Clearly the SM and c do not identify
appropriate criterion for selecting items ac- the same individuals.
cording to both discriminative power and
The SM was also found to be unrelated to
intermediate difficulty level (Nunnally, 1967). Christie and Geis's (1970) Machiavellianism
Items were discarded on the basis of low D (r=-.0931, d f = 5 l , ns), Alpert-Haber
scores until a set of 25 items remained which (1960) Achievement Anxiety Test (r —
maximized the internal consistency of the + .1437, df = 51, ns), and Kassarjian's
scale (Nunnally, 1967, pp. 263-265). The (1962) inner-other directedness (r = —.1944,
Self-Monitoring Scale has a Kuder-Richard- df = 54, ns).
son 20 reliability of .70, and a test-retest
It thus appears that SM is relatively indereliability of .83 (dj = 51, p < .001, one- pendent of the other variables measured.
month time interval). Cross-validation on an
independent sample of 146 University of MinVALIDATION: SELF-MONITORING AND
nesota undergraduates yielded a KuderPEER RATINGS
Richardson 20 reliability coefficient of .63.
As a first source of validity evidence for
The 25 items of the SM, proportions of
the
SM, a sociometric study of peer ratings
respondents answering the item in the lowSM-scored direction, their D values, and item- was conducted. In choosing this method, it
total point-biserial correlations calculated for was assumed that a person who has good conthe University of Minnesota sample are pre- trol of his self-presentation and expressive behavior and who is sensitive to social approsented in Table 1.
priateness cues should be seen as such a perCorrelations with Other Scales
son by others who have had the opportunity
Correlations between the SM and related for repeated observation of his self-presentabut conceptually distinct individual differ- tion in a wide variety of social situations.
ences measures provide some evidence for its
Method
discriminant validity. There is a slight negaSubjects
tive relationship (r = -.1874, dj = 190, p <
.01) between the SM and the MarloweThe subjects in this study were 16 members of a
Crowne Social Desirability Scale (M-C SDS, male fraternity living group at Stanford University
Crowne & Marlowe, 1964). Individuals who who agreed to participate in an investigation of
report that they observe, monitor, and man- person perception.
age their self-presentation are unlikely to report that they engage in rare but socially Procedure
Each subject completed the SM and the M-C SDS
desirable behaviors.
There is a similarly low negative relation- and then participated in a sociometric person perception task.
ship (r=-.2002, d(=19Q, p < .01) beEach subject indicated for each of six other memtween the SM and the Minnesota Multiphasic bers of the fraternity specified for him by the exPersonality Inventory Psychopathic Deviate perimenter whether the following self-monitoring
scale. High-SM subjects are unlikely to report attributes were very true, mostly true, somewhat
or not at all true:
deviant psychopathological behaviors or his- true,
(1) Concerned about acting appropriately in social
tories of maladjustment.
situations;
There is a small and nonsignificant nega(2) Openly expresses his true inner feelings, attitive relationship (r — —.25, df = 24, ns) be- tudes, and beliefs;
(3) Has good self-control of his behavior. Can
tween the SM and the c scale of the Performplay many roles;
ance Style Test, (e.g., Ring & Wallston,
(4) Is good at learning what is socially appropri1968). The c scale was designed to identify a ate in new situations;
(5) Often appears to lack deep emotions; and
person who is knowledgeable about the kind

SELF-MONITORING OF EXPRESSIVE BEHAVIOR

531

TABLE 1
INSTRUCTIONS, ITEMS, SCORING KEY, DIFFICULTY, AND DISCRIMINATION
INDEXES TOR THE SELF-MONITORING SCALE"
Discrimination
Item and scoring key b

1. I find it hard to imitate the behavior of other people. (F)
2. My behavior is usually an expression of my true inner feelings,
attitudes, and beliefs. (F)
3. At parties and social gatherings, I do not attempt to do or
say things that others will like. (F)
4. I can only argue for ideas which I already believe. (F)
5. I can make impromptu speeches even on topics about which
I have almost no information. (T)
6. I guess I put on a show to impress or entertain people. (T)
7. When I am uncertain how to act in a social situation, I look
to the behavior of others for cues. (T)
8. I would probably make a good actor. (T)
9. I rarely need the advice of my friends to choose movies,
books, or music. (F)
10. I sometimes appear to others to be experiencing deeper
emotions than I actually am. (T)
11. I laugh more when I watch a comedy with others than when
alone. (T)
12. In a group of people I am rarely the center of attention. (F)
13. In different situations and with different people, I often act
like very different persons. (T)
14. I am not particularly good at making other people like
me. (F)
IS. Even if I am not enjoying myself, I often pretend to be
having a good time. (T)
16. I'm not always the person I appear to be. (T)
17. I would not change my opinions (or the way I do things) in
order to please someone else or win their favor. (F)
18. I have considered being an entertainer. (T)
19. In order to get along and be liked, I tend to be what people
expect me to be rather than anything else. (T)
20. I have never been good at games like charades or improvisational acting. (F)
21. I have trouble changing my behavior to suit different people
and different situations. (F)
22. At a party I let others keep the jokes and stories going. (F)
23. I feel a bit awkward in company and do not show up quite
so well as I should. (F)
24. I can look anyone in the eye and tell a lie with a straight
face (if for a right end). (T)
25. I may deceive people by being friendly when I really dislike
them. (T)

Difficulty"

D'l

X 2c

P

rpb'

.63

.50

32.07

.0005

.33

.67

.23

7.26

.01

.13

.17
.43

.21
.29

8.29
8.91

.005
.005

.34
.22

.69
.65

.21
.44

6.41
26.5

.025
.0005

.32
.45

.20
.69

.19
.36

6.55
17.8

.025
.0005

.24
.43

.64

.24

6.78

.01

.15

.57

.20

4.78

.05

.39

.33
.64

.23
.32

6.51
13.09

.025
.0005

.29
.40

.40

.22

5.54

.025

.40

.30

.27

10.12

.005

.22

.61
.26

.21
.23

5.67
7.17

.025
.01

.24
.33

.61
.79

.34
.28

15.5
12.64

.0005
.0005

.34
.46

.79

.25

9.96

.005

.29

.52

.45

25.96

.0005

.31

.36
.65

.38
.24

19.35
6.80

.0005
.01

.45
.36

.54

.21

11.05

.001

.32

.58

.38

19.25

.0005

.33

.46

.35

15.07

.0005

.32

Note.
T = true; F = false; SM = Self-Monitoring Scale.
a
Directions for Personal Reaction Inventory were: The statements on the following pages concern your personal reactions to a
number of different situations. No two statements are exactly alike, so consider each statement carefully before answering. If a
statement is TRUE or MOSTLY TRUE as applied to you, blacken the space marked T on the answer sheet. If a statement is
FALSE or NOT USUALLY TRUE as applied to you, blacken the space marked F. Do not put your answers on this test booklet
itself.
It is important that you answer as frankly and as honestly as you can. Your answers will be kept in the strictest confidence,
b Items keyed in the direction of high SM.
od Difficulty = proportion of individuals not responding in SM-keyed direction.
Discrimination = difference between proportions of individuals in upper and lower thirds of total scores responding in hlgh-SM
direction.
8 a
x calculated from the contingency table relating frequencies of T, F for each item and upper third, lower third for total SM
score
(including that item).
f
Point-biserial correlations between individual items and total scores with that item excluded.

(6) Has good self-control of his emotional expression. Can use it to create the impression he
wants.
In addition, two other judgments were required:
"Is ingratiating. Attempts to do or say things designed to make others like him more" (same 4-point
scale as above) and "How much do you like this

person?" (very much, moderately, somewhat, not at
all).

Results and Discussion
Each subject in the experiment served as a
judge of six others and was in turn judged

532

MARK SNYDER

by six other members of his living group. tions of appropriateness. He is also less vigiFor each person as a stimulus, ratings of him lant to such cues.
High and low scorers on the M-C SDS, by
were summed across his six judges to form a
single score on each dimension which could contrast, do not differ in these characteristics.
range from 0 (six ratings of not at all true) In fact, the evidence suggests that if in fact
to 18 (six ratings of very true). For each the M-C SDS is a measure of need for apperson, a single "peer rating of self-monitor- proval, this need is not related to the ability
ing" score was computed by summing across (as perceived by one's peers) to control and
monitor one's self-presentation and emotional
the six self-monitoring dimensions.
The group of 16 subjects was then dichoto- expressive behavior on the basis of situationmized at the median to form a high-SM group to-situation variation in contingencies of social appropriateness.
(n = 8) and a low-SM group (n = 8).
Self-monitoring characteristics were seen as
VALIDATION: SELF-MONITORING, STAGE
more true of high-SM (M = SO.S) than of
ACTORS, AND PSYCHIATRIC
low-SM (M = 40.2) individuals (* = 2.69,
WARD PATIENTS
df=14, p<.02, two-tailed test). No difAnother
means
of establishing the validity
ferences were observed between high-SM and
low-SM individuals on ingratiation or liking of an instrument is by predicting how pre(t = .49 and .20, respectively, df = 14, ns). determined groups of individuals would score
Mean peer rating of self-monitoring, in- when the instrument is administered to them.
gratiation, and liking for high M-C SDS According to this strategy, SM scores of cri(above the median, n = 8) and low M-C SDS terion groups chosen to represent extremes in
(below the median, n = 8) were also calcu- self-monitoring were compared with the unselated. In contrast to SM scores, M-C SDS lected sample of Stanford University underscores were unrelated to peer rating of self- graduates.
monitoring (high M-C SDS M = S4.0, low
M-C SDS M = 56.7, t - .59, df = 14, ns). Professional Stage Actors
Groups of individuals known to be particuThe relationship between the SM, M-C
SDS, and peer rating of self-monitoring may larly skilled at controlling their expressive
be examined in terms of product-moment cor- behavior (e.g., actors, mime artists, and polirelations. There is a significant relationship ticians) should score higher on the SM than
between the SM and peer rating of self-moni- an unselected sample. The SM was admintoring (r=A5, «//=14, p<.05). The istered to a group of 24 male and female drahigher an individual's score on the SM, the matic actors who were appearing in profesmore frequently self-monitoring character- sional productions at Stanford and in San
istics were attributed to him. The M-C SDS Francisco.
and peer rating of self-monitoring are not
Their average score on the SM was 18.41
with a standard deviation of 3.38. This is sigrelated (r = —.14, df = 14, ns).
An image emerges of the high-SM indi- nificantly higher than the mean SM score for
vidual as perceived by his peers. He is a per- the Stanford sample (f = 8.27, df - 555, p
son who, out of a concern for acting appro- < .001).
Thus, stage actors do score higher than
priately in social situations, has become particularly skilled at controlling and modifying nonactors on the SM. Actors probably do
his social behavior and emotional expression have particularly good self-control of their
expressive behavior and self-presentation
to suit his surroundings on the basis of cues
while on stage. It is not clear that actors are
in the situation which indicate what attitudes any more concerned about monitoring their
and emotions are appropriate. The low-SM expressive presentation in other situations.
individual, as perceived by his peers, is less
able and/or less likely to control and modify Hospitalized Psychiatric Ward Patients
The behavior of hospitalized psychiatric
his self-presentation and expressive behavior
to keep it in line with situational specifica- patients is less variable across situations than

SELF-MONITORING OP EXPRESSIVE BEHAVIOR
that of "normals." Moos (1968) investigated
the reactions of patients and staff in a representative sample of daily settings in a psychiatric inpatient ward in order to assess the
relative amount of variance accounted for
by settings and individual differences. The
results indicated that for patients, individual
differences accounted for more variance than
setting differences; whereas for staff, individual differences generally accounted for less
variance than setting differences. One interpretation of this finding is that psychiatric
ward patients are unable or unwilling to
monitor their social behavior and self-presentation to conform to variations in contingencies of social appropriateness between situations. In fact, diagnoses of "normal" and
"psychopathological" may be closely related
to cross-situational plasticity or rigidity
(Cameron, 1950). Moos (1969) has reported
that situational factors play an increasingly
potent role in the behavior of institutionalized
individuals as therapy progresses.
Accordingly, it was expected that a sample
of hospitalized psychiatric ward patients
should score lower on the SM than nonhospitalized normals.
The SM was administered to 31 male hospitalized psychiatric patients at the Menlo
Park Veterans Administration Hospital. Their
psychiatric diagnoses varied, and most had
been previously institutionalized. Each patient's cumulative length of hospitalization
varied from several months to several years.
The average SM score for this group was
10.19 with a standard deviation of 3.63. This
is significantly lower than the mean SM score
for the Stanford sample (t = 3.44, dj = 562,
p< .001).
VALIDATION: SELF-MONITORING AND THE
EXPRESSION OF EMOTION
If the SM discriminates individual differences in the self-control of expressive behavior, this should be reflected behaviorally.
In a situation in which individuals are given
the opportunity to communicate an arbitrary
affective state by means of nonverbal expressive behavior, a high-SM individual should be
able to perform this task more accurately,
easily, and fluently than a low SM.

533

Method
Subjects: Expression of Emotion
Male and female students whose SM scores were
above the 75th percentile (SM > IS) or below the
25th percentile (SM < 9) were recruited by telephone from the pool of pretested introductory psychology students. In all, 30 high-SM and 23 lowSM subjects participated in the study and received
either course credit or $1.50.

Procedure: Expression of Emotion
Each subject was instructed to read aloud an
emotionally neutral three-sentence paragraph (e.g.,
"I am going out now. I won't be back all afternoon. If anyone calls, just tell him I'm not here.")
in such a way as to express each of the seven emotions anger, happiness, sadness, surprise, disgust,
fear, and guilt or remorse using their vocal and
facial expressive behavior. The order of expression
was determined randomly for each subject. The
subject's facial and upper-body expressive behavior
was filmed and his voice tape-recorded. It was
suggested that he imagine he was trying out for a
part in a play and wanted to give an accurate,
convincing, natural, and sincere expression of each
emotion—one that someone listening to the tape or
watching the film would be able to understand as
the emotion the subject had been instructed to express. The procedure is similar to one used by
Levitt (1964).
These filmed and taped samples of expressive
behavior were scored by judges who indicated
which of the seven emotions the stimulus person
was expressing. Accuracy of the judges was used as
a measure of the expressive self-control ability of
the stimulus subjects.

Judgments of Expressive Behavior: Subjects
The films and tapes of expressive behavior were
scored by a group of 20 high-SM (SM > 15, or
top 25%) and 13 low-SM (SM < 9, or bottom
25%) naive judges who were paid $2.00 an hour.

Judgments of Emotional Expressive
Behavior: Procedure
Judges participated in small groups of both highand low-SM judges who watched films for approximately one fourth of the subjects in the expression
experiment and listened to the tapes of approximately another one fourth of the subjects. For each
stimulus segment, judges indicated which of the
seven emotions had been expressed.

Results and Discussion
Accuracy of Expression and SM Scores
Accuracy of the judges in decoding the
filmed and taped expressive behavior for each
stimulus person was used as a measure of his

534

MARK SNYDER

self-control of expressive behavior ability. For
each of the 53 subjects in the expression
task, the average accuracy of his judges was
computed separately for films and tapes and
high- and low-SM judges. Table 2 represents
these accuracy scores as a function of stimulus (expresser) SM scores, facial or vocal
channel of expression, and judge SM score
for naive judges. Each stimulus person expressed seven emotions. Therefore, mean accuracy scores can range from 0 to 7.
The average accuracy scores for each stimulus person's facial and vocal expressive behavior, as judged by high-SM and low-SM
judges, were entered into an analysis of variance. Expresser SM score (high SM or low
SM) was a between-stimulus-persons factor;
channel of expression (face or voice) and
judge SM score (high SM or low SM) were
within-stimulus-persons factors.
The following pattern of results emerges.
Individuals who scored high on the SM were
better able to communicate accurately an
arbitrarily chosen emotion to naive judges
than were individuals who scored low on the
SM. That is, judges were more often accurate
in judging both the facial and vocal expressive behavior generated in this emotion communication task by high-SM stimuli than by
low-SM stimuli (F - 11.72, df = 1/51, p <
.01). For both high- and low-SM stimuli,
accuracy was greater in the vocal than the
facial channel (F = 19.12, df = 1/153, p <
.001). Finally, there was a tendency for highTABLE 2
SM AND ACCURACY OF EXPRESSION 'OP EMOTION :
NAIVE JUDGES
High-SM judge

Low-SM judge

Face

Voice

Face

Voice

3.353
.718

4.047
.636

3.196
1.117

3.564
1.769

2.518
1.348

2.957
.982

2.493
1.479

3.094
2.102

Stimulus
High SM
(n = 30)

M"
Variance
Low SM
(*• = 23)

M
Variance

Note.
SM = Self-Monitoring Scale.
Q
Average accuracy computed for each stimulus across all
judges who rated him and then averaged across « stimulus
persons; range = 0-7.

SM judges to be better judges of emotion
than low-SM judges (F - 1.69, df = 1/153,
p< .25). In addition, high-SM judges may
have been more differentially sensitive to the
expressive behavior of high- and low-SM
stimuli. That is, the difference in accuracy
for judging high-SM and low-SM stimuli for
high-SM judges was greater than the corresponding difference for low-SM judges. However, once again the differences are not significant (F = 2.41, df = 1/153, p < .25).
Discriminant Validation: SM versus M-C
SDS
In the sample of 192 from which the subjects for the expression task were selected,
scores on the SM and M-C SDS were very
slightly correlated (r = — .1874). However,
in the sample of 53 subjects chosen for this
experiment, the correlation was —.3876 (df
= 51, p < .01). Furthermore, individuals
who scored below the median on the M-C
SDS were better able than those who scored
above the median to voluntarily communicate
emotion in this experimental task (F = 4.426,
df=l/5l, / > < .05). These differences present a rival explanation of the differences observed in self-control of expressive behavior
between high-SM and low-SM groups.
To discriminate between the SM and M-C
SDS as predictors of self-control of expression ability, two analyses of covariance were
performed. In the first, accuracy scores for
naive judges collapsed across judge SM score
and channel were examined as a function of
stimulus SM scores as the independent variable and stimulus M-C SDS scores as the covariate. After removing the effects of the
covariate (M-C SDS), there is still a highly
significant treatment (SM) effect (F = 7.13,
df = 1/50, p < .01). That is, individuals who
scored high on the SM were better able than
low-SM scorers to accurately express and
communicate arbitrary emotions independent
of their M-C SDS scores.
In the second analysis of covariance, accuracy scores for naive judges collapsed across
judge SM score and channel were examined
as a function of stimulus M-C SDS as the
independent variable and stimulus SM scores
as the covariate. The results of this analysis

SELF-MONITORING OF EXPRESSIVE BEHAVIOR
are quite conclusive. After removing the effects of the covariate (SM), there is no remaining relationship between the independent
variable (M-C SDS) and expression accuracy
(F=..7S, d / = l / S O , ns). That is, whatever relationship exists between M-C SDS
scores and self-control of expression ability is
entirely accounted for by the slight negative
correlation between the M-C SDS and SM.
Thus, the results of this experiment clearly
indicate that scores on the SM are related to
the self-control of expressive behavior. HighSM individuals were better able than lowSM individuals to express arbitrary emotional states in facial and vocal behavior.
VALIDATION: SELF-MONITORING AND
ATTENTION TO SOCIAL COMPARISON
INFORMATION
It has been proposed that out of a concern
for social appropriateness of his behavior, a
high-SM individual is particularly attentive
to social comparison information and uses
this information as guidelines to monitor and
manage his self-presentation and expressive
behavior.
Consistent with this formulation, high-SM
individuals are seen by their peers as better
able to learn what is socially appropriate in
new situations than are low-SM. Two SM
items which best predict performance in the
emotion expression task are: "When I am
uncertain how to act in a social situation, I
look to the behavior of others for cues," and
"I laugh more when I watch a comedy with
others than when alone."
All of this suggests that, given the opportunity in a self-presentation situation, a highSM individual should be more likely to seek
out relevant social comparison information.
Method
Subjects
Subjects were recruited from the pretested introductory psychology subject pool on the basis of highSM scores (SM > IS) or low-SM scores ( S M < 9 ) .
A total of 14 high-SM and 13 low-SM subjects
participated in the experiment and were paid $1.00.

Procedure
Each subject performed a self-presentation task in
a situation designed to facilitate self-monitoring. He

535

was asked to respond to a series of true-false selfdescriptive personality test items in preparation for
a discussion of how test-takers decide how to respond to ambiguously worded questionnaire items,
During the task he was given the opportunity to
consult a "majority response sheet" which listed the
modal response of his introductory psychology class
for each item in order to consider possible alternative interpretations of the items in preparation for
the discussion.
Pretesting had indicated that the task was interpreted as neither social pressure to consult the information nor a test of resistance to temptation to
cheat. Rather it appears that a situation was created in which the subjects knew that normative
social comparison information was available to
them and they could consult it or not as they wished
in preparation for a later discussion of their selfdescriptions on the questionnaire items.
Unknown to the subject who performed this task
alone, an observer in the next room recorded the
frequency with which the subject consulted the
majority response sheet and timed each look. The
sheet had been left by the experimenter at the far
corner of the subject's table so that consulting it
required observable but not effortful behavior by
the subject. It was expected that a high-SM subject would look more often, as measured by frequency and duration of looking, at this social comparison information than would a low-SM subject.

Results and Discussion
Results on the dependent measures of seeking out of social comparison information
were analyzed as a function of both SM and
M-C SDS scores (rSM,M_0 SDS = -.067, dj =
25, ns) in a 2 X 2 (High SM, Low SM X
High M-C SDS, Low M-C SDS) unweighted
means analysis of variance.
There were three measures of seeking out
social comparison information during the selfpresentation task: (a) frequency of looking
at the majority response sheet as recorded by
the observer; (b) frequency of looking at the
majority response sheet as measured by the
subject's retrospective self-report; and (c)
total duration of looking at the majority response sheet as timed by the observer. These
three measures are highly intercorrelated (r&
= .92, r13 = .90, r2S = .83, df = 2 5 , p <
.001). The means for each of these measures
are presented in Table 3.
For frequency of looking as recorded by an
observer, a high-SM subject looked more frequently than a low-SM at the majority response sheet (F = 4.70, df = 1/23, p < .05).

MARK SNYDER

536

TABLE 3
THREE MEASURES or LOOKING AT SOCIAL
COMPARISON INFORMATION
Measure
High SM, low
M-C SDS
High SM, high
M-C SDS
Low SM, low
M-C SDS
Low SM, high
M-C SDS

n

Total
duration of
Frequency Frequency
of looking* of looking1* looking (in
seconds)

6

14.67

15.83

20.83

8

12.25

12.25

19.38

7

5.14

5.83

5.43

6

4.83

4.13

4.83

Note. SM = Self-Monitoring Scale; M-C SDS = MarloweCrowne
Social Desirability Scale.
a
Recorded by observer.
b
Subject's self-report.

Given the opportunity to consult social comparison information in a self-presentation
situation in which they expected to justify
their self-descriptions, high self-monitors did
so more frequently than did low self-monitors.
There was no systematic relationship between M-C SDS and looking behavior (F —
.122, dj = l/23,ns), nor was there any interaction between SM and M-C SDS scores (F
= .011, df = 1/23, ns). Thus, there was no
relationship between the tendency to describe
oneself in socially desirable fashion and consulting social comparison information in this
self-presentation situation.
Analyses of subjects' self-report of looking
behavior and total time looking measured by
the observer result in identical conclusions.
For either measure, high-SM subjects were
more likely than low-SM to seek out social
comparison information.
CONCLUSIONS
Individuals differ in the extent to which
they monitor (observe and control) their expressive behavior and self-presentation. Out
of a concern for social appropriateness, the
self-monitoring individual is particularly sensitive to the expression and self-presentation
of others in social situations and uses these
cues as guidelines for monitoring and managing his own self-presentation and expressive
behavior. In contrast, the non-self-monitoring
person has little concern for the appropriateness of his presentation and expression, pays
less attention to the expression of others, and

monitors and controls his presentation to a
lesser extent. His presentation and expression
appear to be controlled from within by his
experience rather than by situational and
interpersonal specifications of appropriateness.
A self-report measure of individual differences in self-monitoring was constructed. The
Self-Monitoring Scale is internally consistent,
temporally stable, and uncorrelated with selfreport measure of related concepts.
Four studies were conducted to validate the
Self-Monitoring Scale. According to their
peers, individuals with high SM scores are
good at learning what is socially appropriate
in new situations, have good self-control of
their emotional expression, and can effectively
use this ability to create the impressions they
want. Theater actors scored higher and hospitalized psychiatric ward patients scored
lower than university students. Individuals
with high SM scores were better able than
those with low SM scores to intentionally
express and communicate emotion in both the
vocal and facial channels of expressive behavior. In a self-presentation task, individuals
with high SM scores were more likely than
those with low scores to seek out and consult
social comparison information about their
peers. Self-monitoring and need for approval
were compared as predictors of each external
criterion to demonstrate the discriminant
validity of the SM.
REFERENCES
Alpert, R., & Haber, R. Anxiety in academic achievement situations. Journal of Abnormal and Social
Psychology, 1960, 61, 207-215.
Anastasi, A. Psychological testing. New York: Macmillan, 1968.
Bern, D. J. Constructing cross-situational consistencies in behavior: Some thoughts on Alker's
critique of Mischel. Journal of Personality, 1972,
40, 17-26.
Buck, R., Savin, V. J., Miller, R., & Caul, W. F.
Nonverbal communication of affect in humans.
Journal of Personality and Social Psychology,
1972, 23, 362-371.
Cameron, N. W. Role concepts in behavior pathology. American Journal of Sociology, 1950, 55,
464-467.
Campbell, D. J. Recommendations for APA test
standards regarding construct, trait, and discriminant validity. American Psychologist, 1960, 15,
S46-S53.
Campbell, D. J., & Fiske, D. W. Convergent and
discriminant validation by the multitrait-multi-

SELF-MONITORING or EXPRESSIVE BEHAVIOR
method matrix. Psychological 'Bulletin, 1959, 56,
81-105.
Christie, R., & Geis, F. L. Studies in Machiavellianism. New York: Academic Press, 1970.
Cronbach, L. J., & Meehl, P. E. Construct validity
in psychological tests. Psychological Bulletin,
195S, 52, 281-302.
Crowne, D. P., & Marlowe, D. The approval motive. New York: Wiley, 1964.
Davitz, J. R. (Ed.) The communication of emotional meaning. New York: McGraw-Hill, 1964.
Ekman, P. Universals and cultural differences in
facial expressions of emotion. In J. Cole (Ed.),
Nebraska Symposium on Motivation: 1971. Lincoln: University of Nebraska Press, 1971.
Ekman, P., & Friesen, W. V. Nonverbal leakage and
clues to deception. Psychiatry, 1969, 32, 88-105.
Ekman, P., & Friesen, W. V. Judging deception
from the face or body. Paper presented at the
meeting of the Western Psychological Association, Portland, Oregon, April 1972.
Freud, S. Fragment of an analysis of a case of
hysteria (1905). In, Collected Papers. Vol. 3.
New York: Basic Books, 1959.
Goffman, E. On face work: An analysis of ritual
elements in social interaction. Psychiatry, 1955,
18, 213-221.
Hall, E. T. The hidden dimension. Garden City,
N.Y.: Doubleday, 1966.
Kassarjian, W. M. A study of Riesman's theory of
social character. Sodomelry, 1962, 25, 213-230.

537

Levitt, E. A. The relationship between abilities to
express emotional meanings vocally and facially.
In J. R. Davitz (Ed.), The communication of
emotional meaning. New York: McGraw-Hill,
1964.
Mehrabian, A. Significance of posture and position
in the communication of attitude and status relationship. Psychological Bulletin, 1969, 71, 359-372.
Mischel, W. Personality and assessment. New York:
Wiley, 1968.
Moos, R. H. Situational analysis of a therapeutic
community milieu. Journal of Abnormal Psychology, 1968, 73, 49-61.
Moos, R. H. Sources of variance in responses to
questionnaires and in behavior. Journal of Abnormal Psychology, 1969, 74, 403-412.
Nunnally, J. C. Psychometric theory. New York:
McGraw-Hill, 1967.
Ring, K., & Wallston, K. A test to measure performance styles in interpersonal relations. Psychological Reports, 1968, 22, 147-154.
Schachter, S., & Singer, J. Cognitive, social, and
physiological determinants of emotional state.
Psychological Review, 1962, 69, 379-399.
Sommer, R. Personal space. Englewood Cliffs, N.J.:
Prentice-Hall, 1969.
Zaidel, S., & Mehrabian, A. The ability to communicate and infer positive and negative attitudes
facially and vocally. Journal of Experimental
Research in Personality, 1969, 3, 233-241.
(Received February 23, 1973)

