Journal of Personality and Social Psychology
1994, Vol. 66, No. 4,742-752

Copyright 1994 by the American Psychological Association, Inc
0O22-3514/94/S3.OO

The Consideration of Future Consequences: Weighing Immediate and
Distant Outcomes of Behavior
Alan Strathman, Faith Gleicher, David S. Boninger, and C. Scott Edwards
We propose a new construct called consideration of future consequences (CFC), which is hypothesized to be a stable individual difference in the extent to which people consider distant versus immediate consequences of potential behaviors. Following a description of the construct itself, a measure
of this individual difference is developed and validated. Data collected from 7 samples of college
students indicates that the measure has acceptable reliability and validity. In addition, evidence of
the role of CFC in regulating affective responses to negative events is reviewed. The utility of the CFC
construct is demonstrated in 2 studies. The 1st study shows that CFC affects the extent to which
individuals are influenced by a persuasive communication; the 2nd demonstrates that CFC predicts
health and environmental behaviors better than do other related constructs. Areas of application
and future research are discussed.

Over the last several decades, advances in scientific technology and medical understanding have demonstrated that the extent to which individuals consider the future implications of
current activities can have significant implications for their
choice of behavior and, in the long run, for their life outcomes.
For example, advances in medicine have clearly demonstrated
the importance of whether individuals think about the longterm consequences of immediate behaviors. Several modern
health problems (i.e., heart disease, AIDS, and some types of
cancer) have now been found to be the direct result of behaviors
that may have occurred 10 or 20 years before the onset of symptoms. Thus, many health campaigns now stress the idea that
engaging in behaviors such as smoking, drinking, and eating nutritionally unsound foods may carry serious future costs for
those who engage in them. The present research starts with the
notion that there are clear and reliable individual differences
in the extent to which individuals are likely to consider distant
outcomes in choosing their present behavior. At one end of the
continuum are those individuals who consider future outcomes
as a matter of course. These individuals believe certain behaviors are worthwhile because of future benefits, even if immediate outcomes are relatively undesirable, or even if there are immediate costs. They are willing to sacrifice immediate benefits

Alan Strathman, Department of Psychology and Center for Research
in Social Behavior, University of Missouri, Columbia; Faith Gleicher,
Department of Psychology, University of California, Santa Barbara; David S. Boninger, Department of Psychology, University of California,
Los Angeles; C. Scott Edwards, Department of Psychology, Florida
State University.
We thank Bob Arkin, David Armor, Daphne Bugental, John Hetts,
and three anonymous reviewers for their help during various phases of
this research.
Correspondence concerning this article should be addressed to Alan
Strathman, Department of Psychology, University of Missouri, 210 McAlester Hall, Columbia, Missouri 65211. Electronic mail may be sent
to psy371@mizzoul.missoun.edu.

like pleasure or convenience to achieve more desirable future
states.
At the other end of the continuum are individuals who are
not interested in considering possible future consequences.
These individuals are more concerned with maximizing immediate benefits at the expense of costs or benefits that will not
occur for some time, and they place a high priority on such
immediate benefits. Thus, when individuals who do not typically consider future consequences encounter information
about diminishing landfill space, they mayfindthis future-relevant information unpersuasive. This may be because they think
that immediate goals are more important, or they may be more
strongly influenced by the relatively more concrete and certain
immediate consequences than by uncertain, probabilistic future outcomes.
In this article, the Consideration of Future Consequences
(CFC) Scale is presented as a measure of this individual difference, as is evidence attesting to the reliability and validity of the
scale, and evidence that the construct is meaningful and has
consequences for attitudes and behaviors. Although we consider
this research to capture a unique aspect of future thought, the
importance of concepts such as future time perspective and future orientation has been demonstrated in past research (see
deVoider, 1979; deVoider & Lens, 1982; Fraisse, 1963; Lamm,
Schmidt, & Trommsdorff, 1976;LeShan, 1952; Nuttin, 1964,
1985; Nuttin & Lens, 1985; Wallace & Rabin, 1960; Zaleski,
1992).
Prior Conceptualizations and Operation of Future
Orientation
Typically, future orientation has been considered as a general
preoccupation with the future or future events. This idea is reflected in researchers' definitions of future orientation and future time perspective. For instance, Kastenbaum (1961) defined
future time perspective (FTP) as "a general concern for future
events" (p. 204). Wallace (1956) described differences in FTP
as "the length of the future time span over which one conceptualizes personalized future events" (p. 240).

742

743

FUTURE CONSEQUENCES

This common view of future orientation is also reflected in
the measures typically used to measure future concern. Perhaps
the most common measure (see Barndt & Johnson, 1955; Teahan, 1958) is to provide individuals with the beginning of a
story that they are to finish. After the subjects complete the
story, they are asked by the experimenter to estimate how much
time passed in the duration of the story.
Brock and Del Giudice (1963) used an additional measure of
time orientation in which subjects were presented with a list of
10 simple nouns (e.g., school and door) and 10 words related to
time (e.g., minute, day, and tomorrow). Subjects were then asked
to choose the 10 words that would be the best to use in telling a
story. A third method (see, for example, Klineberg, 1968) involves asking subjects to recall 10 things that they have thought
or spoken about during the preceding week or two. The experimenter then questions the subjects until the temporal focus of
the thing about which they had thought or spoken is determined
and the proportion of references to the past, present, and future
is noted. A fourth method (see Lessing, 1972) involves asking
subjects to choose a number of events they think about now or
for which they have started to plan (e.g., buying a car, getting
married, and having children). Subjects are then asked to estimate the number of years that will elapse before they expect
each event to occur.
One problem with these measures has been that they do not
seem to provide consistent results. Studies that have used
multiple measures have found patterns of data that are not consistent across measures, and studies that have used one measure
of future orientation have tended not to replicate earlier work
that had used a different measure of future orientation. In one
study, Lessing (1968) measured future orientation with the future events test, the incomplete sentences measure, and the
story completion task. Lessing found that the intercorrelations
of these measures were .06 (incomplete sentences and story
completion),. 10 (story completion and events), and .37 (incomplete sentences and events).
A few researchers have used questionnaires to measure time
orientation. Stewart (1976) developed the Stewart Personality
Inventory (SPI), an 80-item scale composed of 8 subscales including one intended to measure future orientation. Respondents were asked to indicate which of the items they liked or
thought they would like. Items on the Future Orientation subscale included "planning the future" and "thinking about distant goals." Unfortunately, a factor analysis of the items (Stewart & Ahmed, 1984) yielded 10 interpretable factors, none of
which could be considered future orientation.
In a recent dissertation, Sanders (1986) developed a series of
questions designed to measure subjective time experience. Six
factors were identified, including a Future Orientation factor.
Items on the Future Orientation subscale included "I think a lot
about the future" and "Much of my talk is about the future."
However, no information concerning the reliability or validity
of the questions intended to address future orientation was included.
The Stanford Time Perspective Inventory (Zimbardo, 1990)
consists of 38 items tapping the dimensions of past, present, and
future orientation. Gonzalez and Zimbardo (1985) described
seven factors, four of which they considered future-oriented factors. Gonzalez and Zimbardo labeled these four factors Work

Motivation, Goal Seeking, Daily Planning, and Pragmatic Action for Future Gain. It is this last subscale that is most similar
to the present measure. Items loading on this factor included
"It makes sense to invest a substantial part of my income in
insurance premiums" and "I believe it is important to save for
a rainy day."

Consideration of Future Consequences
Both the questionnaire methods and the more projective
measures are similar to the present method of measurement in
that they are attempts to measure a relatively stable construct.
They differ from the present method in that they typically measure a general preoccupation with the future or concern with
specific future events. Although this preoccupation with present and future time is interesting, it represents a significantly
different construct from the consideration of future consequences presented in this article.
The CFC refers to the extent to which individuals consider
the potential distant outcomes of their current behaviors and
the extent to which they are influenced by these potential outcomes. It involves the intrapersonal struggle between present
behavior with one set of immediate outcomes and one set of
future outcomes. Whether particular individuals resolve this dilemma between present and future in favor of one or the other
is hypothesized to be a relatively stable characteristic. Individuals low in CFC are expected to focus more on their immediate,
versus distant, needs and concerns, and are thus expected to act
to satisfy these immediate needs. At the extreme end of this
continuum, individuals may not even consider future consequences of their behavior. In contrast, people who are high in
CFC are expected to consider the future implications of their
behavior and to use their distant goals as guides for their current
actions. Again, in extreme cases, they may not consider immediate implications at all.
Scale Development and Validation
Three samples of college students received a set of 24 statements generated by us. These statements were intended to determine the degree to which each individual considered distant
outcomes when deciding on his or her present behavior. Sample
1 comprised college students at the University of Missouri.
Samples 2 and 3 were college students at the University of California, Los Angeles, who were administered the CFC as part
of other ongoing investigations. From these 24 items, we used
reliability assessments and factor loadings to identify a subset of
12 items (see the Appendix) that provided a valid and reliable
measure of CFC. Four additional samples of respondents (Samples 4-7) received only these 12 items of interest. Subsets of
respondents from Samples 1 and 4 returned at a later time to
provide data concerning stability of the measure. In addition to
these seven samples of students, an eighth sample of respondents was composed of individuals who belonged to student organizations involved in issues related to social causes at the University of Missouri. Indices of reliability and validity, described
later in this article, are reported only for the four administrations of the reduced 12-item scale (data for all administrations
can be found in Table 1).

744

STRATHMAN, GLEICHER, BONINGER, AND EDWARDS
Table 1

Descriptive Information About the Six Administrations of the
Consideration ofFuture Consequences Scale
Sample receiving
24-item scale
sample
Time
Location
n
M
SD
Cronbach's a

Sample receiving
12-item scale

1

2

3

4

5

6

7

Fall
1991

UMC
167

Fall
1991
UCLA

Spring
1992
UCLA

Fall
1992

Spring
1993

Spring
1993

294

267

UMC
323

UMC
379

UMC
153

Spring
1993
UCSB
138

43.8
7.08
.817

44.3
7.84
.819

44.1
6.93
.784

41.4
7.86
.800

43.1
7.02
.816

43.8
7.64
.860

41.9
7.06
.805

Note. UMC = University of Missouri; UCLA = University of California, Los Angeles; UCSB = University
of California, Santa Barbara.

Indications ofReliability
Internal Consistency
Cronbach's alpha was computed for each of the four samples
that received the reduced version of the scale (see Table 1). Coefficient alphas for the four samples were .80 (item-total correlation range of .26-.67), .82 (item-total correlation range of
.30-.70), .86 (item-total correlation range of .32-.71), and .81
(item-total correlation range of .27-.64).
Stability
To examine the stability of the CFC Scale over time, we computed test-retest reliability for Samples 1 and 4. Eighty-eight of
the original 167 respondents from Sample 1 returned after a 2week interval and completed the identical measure. The correlation between the first and second administration was .76, p
< .001. Of the original 323 respondents from Sample 4, 102
returned after a 5-week interval and completed the identical
measure. The correlation between the first and second administration was .72, p < .001. These correlations provide evidence
of the temporal stability of the CFC Scale.
Factor Analyses
Factor analyses of the CFC Scale occurred in two phases. We
conducted exploratory factor analysis on Sample 1 to eliminate
items that did not load on the underlying factor of consideration
of future consequences. Principal factors analysis on data from
Sample 1 indicated that a one-factor solution provided the best
fit of the data. Of the 12 items retained in the CFC Scale, factor
loadings ranged from .30-.72, and the one factor accounted for
94.6% of the variance.
Because confirmatory factor analyses provide a stronger test
of the hypothesized factor structure of the scale items than do
exploratory analyses, data from Samples 2, 3, and 4 were subjected to confirmatory factor analysis using the factor pattern
determined by the exploratory factor analysis of Sample 1. Confirmatory factor analysis was accomplished by using the LISREL VII program (Joreskog & Sorbom, 1990). Our goal was to
confirm that data from Samples 2, 3, and 4 conformed to the

proposed one-factor model identified in Sample 1. Although
chi-square statistics indicated statistically significant differences
between the observed and predicted covariance matrixes for
Sample 2, x2(54, TV = 294) = 117.82, p < .001, Sample 3, x 2 (54,
N = 267) = 156.24, p < .001, and Sample 4, x2(54, TV = 323) =
222.41, p < .001, it is well-known that chi-square statistics offer
overly conservative estimates of the goodness of fit of a model
(seeBurt, 1973).
Because the chi-square statistic is too conservative to provide
an informative measure offit,a number of researchers have proposed alternative indices of goodness of fit. One such indicator
of fit, proposed by Wheaton, Muthen, Alwin, & Summers
(1977), is the ratio of the chi-square to its degrees of freedom.
Wheaton et al. suggested that a ratio of 5:1 or less indicates adequatefit.Our ratios of 2.18:1,2.89:1, and 4.11:1 for Samples 2,
3, and 4, respectively, fall well below Wheaton et al.'s acceptable
limit. We also computed one other commonly used indication
of fit, the root-mean-square residual (RMSR). The RMSR can
be thought of as an average of the discrepancies between the
observed and predicted correlation (or covariance) matrices
(Loehlin, 1992). As such, RMSR can range from 0 to 1, with
good fit being indicated by values close to 0. Computation of
the RMSR confirms that a single factor solution for data from
Sample 2 (RMSR = .057), Sample 3 (RMSR = .059), and Sample 4 (RMSR = .069) provides an adequate fit.

Indications of Validity
Three pieces of evidence demonstrating the validity of the
CFC Scale are presented. First, to provide convergent validity,
data concerning the relationship between the CFC Scale and
other relevant individual-differences measures is presented.
Second, scores from the first four samples of respondents are
compared with scores from a separate group of respondents
that constitutes a known group. Third, the results of an experimental investigation involving the CFC Scale are presented. Finally, we present data that provides evidence that the CFC Scale
accounts for unique variance in a number of dependent variables over and above several related measures.

FUTURE CONSEQUENCES

Relationship With Other Measures
Evidence for the notion that orientation toward the future is
related to willingness to delay gratification (see Mischel, 1958)
was provided by Klineberg (1968). In this study, Klineberg
found that preference for a larger, delayed reward over a smaller,
immediate reward was related to the degree of everyday preoccupation with the future. To assess the relationship between the
delay of gratification and consideration of future consequences,
respondents from Sample 1 completed a 12-item instrument
intended to assess a general trait of deferment of gratification
(Ray & Najman, 1986). The correlation between the CFC Scale
and Ray and Najman's Deferment of Gratification Scale was
.47,p<.001(n = 167).
We also expected orientation toward the future to be positively related to locus of control (see Rotter, Chance, & Phares,
1972). Franklin (1963) and Rotter and Mulry (1965) found evidence that locus of control was positively related to degree of
achievement motivation. Teahan (1958) found evidence of a
similar relation between achievement motivation and future
orientation, and Nurmi (1987) and Platt and Eisenman (1968)
found evidence of a relation between future orientation and locus of control. To examine the relation between locus of control
and CFC, subjects from Sample 1 also completed the InternalExternal Locus of Control Scale (Rotter, 1966). The correlation
between the I-E Scale and the CFC Scale was .25, p < .01 (n =
167). The magnitude of this correlation is interesting because it
indicates that there is a significant, albeit modest, relationship
between CFC and locus of control. The low correlation suggests
that perceived control over outcomes represents only one component of the tendency to consider future outcomes.
Finally, subjects in this first sample received the Stanford
Time Perspective Inventory (Zimbardo, 1990). As mentioned
earlier, this measure consists of items assessing past, present,
and future orientation. Scores on the CFC Scale were correlated
with the future orientation items of the Stanford measure. This
correlation was .43, p < .001 (« = 167), indicating, not surprisingly, that the CFC Scale is related to a more general preoccupation with the future.
Comparison With a Known Group
We have identified social activism as one type of behavior
likely to be influenced by a consideration of future consequences. We hypothesize this to be the case because there are
often no immediate positive outcomes of such activities. In addition, the future outcomes may be very distant or may never be
experienced by the activist. For instance, individuals working to
reduce the emissions leading to global warming must realize
that because of the slow rate at which regulations are enacted,
obvious signs of a reverse in warming may not be seen for many
years. If this is the case, then activists ought to be high in the
extent to which their behavior is influenced by future outcomes,
indicating a willingness to forgo immediate outcomes in favor
of distant ones.
To test this possibility, we recruited a separate sample of respondents from University of Missouri student organizations
involved in social causes. This sample of respondents (« = 22)
was drawn from four such organizations: College Democrats,

745

Black Students for Progressive Change, Committee Against Intervention, and National Organization for the Reform of Marijuana Laws. Samples 1, 2, 3, and 4 and the activist sample were
entered as afive-levelindependent variable in a one-way analysis of variance (ANOVA) with score on the CFC Scale as the
dependent variable. This analysis yielded a significant F value,
F(3, 746) = 5.20, p < .05. Mean scores on Samples 1 (M =
43.8), 2 (M = 44.3), 3 (M = 44.1), and 4 (M = 41.4) were not
found to be significantly different from each other by the Newman-Keuls test, but each was significantly different from the
mean score of the activist sample (M - 52.3).
Psychological Consequences of CFC
Another method of demonstrating the usefulness of an individual-differences measure is to show that it predicts response
patterns in theoretically expected ways. The extent to which
people consider the future consequences of current behaviors is
likely to have an important impact on attitudes, behaviors, and
information processing. A test of the impact of CFC on information processing is reported by Boninger, Gleicher, & Strathman (1993).
This study examined the effects of CFC and a manipulated
future focus on individuals' affective responses to counterfactual simulations of reality. Much research has suggested that
when people experience negative outcomes, they spontaneously
consider hypothetical alternative outcomes (i.e., "what could
have been"; e.g., Wells & Gavanski, 1989). If the counterfactual
alternatives that are considered can change the negative outcome to something neutral or even positive, the individual feels
worse about what actually happened to him or her than if she or
he does not consider the counterfactual at all or if the counterfactual does not change the negative outcome (e.g., Kahneman
& Miller, 1986).
Boninger et al. (1993) suggested a qualification to this influence of counterfactual thought on affect. They noted that sometimes counterfactuals can prepare people to deal with future
events (see also Markman, Gavanski, Sherman, & McMullen,
1993). Whereas people who are concerned primarily with present outcomes would be unlikely to be affected by this feature of
counterfactuals, those people who are concerned with future
outcomes would be expected to be reassured at knowing that
they have learned something that will be of use to them in the
future. Boninger et al. thus predicted that subjects who were
guided to dwell on a negative event that just happened, regardless of their level of CFC, would feel particularly bad when there
was a counterfactual that could have changed the negative outcome. However, they expected that of subjects who were guided
to think about the future, only those low in CFC would feel bad.
The negative affect of subjects high in CFC, in contrast, was
expected to be alleviated by thoughts of future preparation.
In the experiment (Boninger et al., 1993, Experiment 2), subjects imagined they were an athlete who was preparing to compete in pre-Olympic national competitions. Subjects read and
imagined that just before theirfirstnational race, they sustain a
painful ankle injury. They are given a choice of two drugs to
take to alleviate the pain. They choose one of the drugs, which
effectively reduces the pain but induces nausea and fatigue that
cause them to lose the race. In this situation, the available

746

STRATHMAN, GLEICHER, BONINGER, AND EDWARDS

counterfactual that subjects consider is that they could have
taken the other drug. Some subjects read that other athletes who
took the other drug suffer the same side effects that they do (i.e.,
no change in outcome). Other subjects read that the other athletes who took the other drug suffer no side effects (i.e., change
in outcome; they could have won if they had taken the other
drug). At the end of the scenario, subjects were either instructed
to think about the race they just lost (present focus) or to think
about the next race 2 weeks away (future focus).
Consistent with predictions, findings on three measures of
affect showed that subjects suffered more regret and blamed
themselves more for the loss when they knew that the other athletes did not suffer the same side effects. More important, however, this negative affect was ameliorated for high-CFC subjects
who thought about their next upcoming race. These high-CFC
individuals, who tend to consider and try to influence future
outcomes, presumably felt better about their loss because they
learned something useful from their experience: next time they
would take the better drug and possibly win. Low-CFC subjects,
on the other hand, who weigh immediate outcomes more
heavily, were not able to benefit from an induced future focus;
their affect was not influenced by thoughts of how their current
loss might lead to future gain. These data provide evidence that
CFC has important psychological consequences.
Experiment 1
In the current research, we wanted to provide a further demonstration of the influence of CFC on behaviors, attitudes, and
information processing. We therefore constructed a series of
strict tests of the effects of CFC, expecting that if it is a consequential individual difference, it would exert its influence in a
variety of domains.
One goal of the current research was to provide an experimental demonstration of the effect of CFC on information processing. One implication of CFC is that high- and low-CFC individuals, when they consider the same current behavior, ought
to be differentially concerned about the immediate and longterm consequences of that behavior. In other words, if high- and
low-CFC individuals considered both immediate and distant
consequences of the same behavior, we would expect low-CFC
individuals to be more favorable toward the behavior if the immediate consequences were positive, regardless of the potential
distant consequences. We would expect high-CFC individuals,
on the other hand, to be more favorable toward the behavior if
the distant consequences were positive, regardless of the current
consequences.
To examine these hypotheses, we presented high- and lowCFC subjects with a message that discussed both the advantages
and disadvantages of increased oil drilling off the California
coast. We expected our subjects, who were mostly young, proenvironmental California residents, to oppose increased oil
drilling. However, we also expected that CFC would influence
how subjects responded to the message. Because offshore drilling tends to be perceived as bad for the environment, we expected high-CFC subjects to weight long-term environmental
concerns relatively high in their evaluation of the advantages
and the disadvantages of increased drilling. Thus, we expected
high-CFC subjects to be more critical of the arguments in favor

of offshore drilling and to oppose it more than low-CFC subjects.
Finally, we expected that the main effect of CFC would be
modified by whether the advantages to increased drilling were
framed as immediate or distant. We expected that when the advantages were framed as immediate, low-CFC subjects would
be more favorable than they would be when the advantages were
framed as distant. Conversely, we expected that when the advantages were framed as distant, high-CFC subjects would be
more favorable than they would be when the advantages were
framed as immediate.

Method
Subjects
Two hundred eight students in an introductory social psychology
course at UCLA participated in exchange for extra course credit.

Procedure
All subjects received a booklet that presented the study as a series of
pretests of materials to be used in experiments the following quarter.
They were informed that they would be asked to answer several sets of
questions about their attitudes and behaviors and to read and respond
to an essay. First, subjects were asked several questions pertaining to a
variety of behaviors and attitudes. The target item asked subjects to indicate (on a 7-point scale that ranged from not at all to very much) how
concerned they were about environmental issues. This item served as a
covariate in the experiment.
After they completed the attitude and behavior survey, subjects read
a two-sided message on the topic of oil drilling off the coast of California.
All versions of the message presented four main arguments describing
the consequences of offshore drilling: two in favor of offshore drilling
(arguing that increased drilling would lead to a reduction in dependence
on nuclear power and to a reduction of gas and oil prices) and two
against it (arguing that increased drilling would lead to oil seepage and
to a diversion of research funds from alternative sources of energy). Although the same advantages and disadvantages were presented in all
conditions, we manipulated the temporal framing of these consequences. In one version of the message, the advantages were presented
as immediate and the disadvantages as distant. In this message, for example, offshore drilling was described as likely to lead directly to immediate reductions in gas prices, whereas the pollution caused by oil seepage would not be likely to be seen for many years. In the other version
of the essay, the timing of the advantages and disadvantages was
switched, such that the disadvantages were immediate and the advantages distant. In this essay, then, gas prices were predicted to drop eventually, but not for several years, whereas oil seepage would lead to immediate increases in pollution. We also manipulated whether the advantages or disadvantages were presented first.
After subjects read the message, they completed a thought listing task
in which they wrote down all the thoughts that crossed their minds as
they read the message. They then responded to three 9-point scales that
assessed their attitudes toward increased offshore drilling. These scales
assessed the extent to which subjects favored offshore drilling (from not
at all in favor to very much in favor), how positive they believed drilling
to be (from negative to positive), and how good they believed drilling to
be (from bad to good). Subjects completed several ancillary measures
and then turned back to the thoughts they had listed and rated each
thought for whether it was positive, negative, or neutral toward offshore
oil drilling. Finally, subjects completed the 12-item version of the CFC
Scale, were debriefed, and were dismissed.

747

FUTURE CONSEQUENCES

Table 2
Effect ofCFC and Framing ofConsequences on Attitudes
Toward Increased Offshore Oil Drilling
Measure of attitude
Framing of
advantages

Negativepositive

Not in favorin favor

Badgood

Low CFC subjects
Immediate
Distant

3.84
3.36

Immediate
Distant

2.28
2.83

3.57
3.47

3.70
3.47

2.34
2.68

2.46
2.83

High CFC subjects

Note. Ratings were made on 9-point scales. Higher numbers indicate
more positive attitude toward increased offshore oil drilling. CFC =
consideration of future consequences.

Results
CFC Scale
Responses to the 12 items of the CFC Scale were averaged.
Scores ranged from 1.67 to 5.00, with a median of 3.83. Ten
subjects who failed to complete the scale were removed from
further analyses.

Attitudes Toward Offshore Oil Drilling
To analyze subjects' responses to the persuasive message, subjects were divided into low- and high-CFC groups on the basis
of a median split of the distribution of CFC scores. Their responses to the three measures of attitude toward increased offshore drilling were then analyzed in a 2 (CFC: low or high) X 2
(framing of consequences: immediate or distant advantages) X
2 (order: advantages or disadvantagesfirst)multivariate analysis
of variance (MANOVA), in which their concern about the environment was entered as a covariate.'
First, this analysis supported our initial assumptions regarding subjects' perceptions of offshore oil drilling. Subjects tended
to oppose offshore drilling (overall M = 3.07, reliably below the
midpoint on a 9-point scale). More important, the MANOVA
yielded the predicted main effect of CFC (Wilks's X = .93), F(3,
193) = 5.16, /7 < .003. Univariate analyses indicated that all
three measures contributed significantly to this effect; compared with high CFC subjects, low CFC subjects reported that
they were more in favor of drilling (Ms = 2.49 and 3.52), F(l,
195) = 12.59, p < .0001, and that increased drilling was more
positive (Ms = 2.52 and 3.58), F(l, 195) = 15.23, p < .0001,
and better (Ms = 2.62 and 3.58), F(l, 195)= 10.87,p< .0001.
The main effect of CFC was qualified by the predicted Framing of Consequences X CFC interaction (Wilks's X = .96), F(3,
193) = 2.36, p = .07. The top two rows of Table 2 show that lowCFC subjects favored increased offshore drilling to a greater extent when its advantages, rather than its disadvantages, were
portrayed as immediate. This pattern reversed for high-CFC
subjects, as the bottom two rows of Table 2 indicate. High-CFC

subjects favored increased drilling more when its advantages
were portrayed as distant and its disadvantages as immediate.
Univariate analysis indicated that the negative-positive measure was the strongest contributor to this effect, F(l, 195) =
4.39, p < .04. Although the pattern of the interactions for the
other two measures paralleled that of the negative-positive
measure, the interactions were not significant (ps > . 10).2

Thought Listings
The number of positive and negative thoughts that subjects
generated in response to the message were analyzed in the
context of a 2 (CFC: low or high) X 2 (framing of consequences:
immediate or distant advantages) X 2 (order: advantages or disadvantages first) X 2 (type of thoughts: negative or positive)
mixed ANOVA, in which type of thoughts was a within-subjects
measure. This ANO\ft indicated, first, that consistent with
their generally negative attitude toward increased oil drilling,
subjects tended to generate more negative (M = 3.74) than positive (M = 1.12) thoughts about drilling, F( 1, 200) = 131.99, p
< .0001. A CFC X Type of Thought interaction, F(l, 200) =
4.22, p < .04, also indicated that the effect of CFC on subjects'
thoughts about offshore oil drilling paralleled its effects on their
attitudes. Planned comparisons indicated that although they
generated an equivalent number of positive thoughts about drilling (Ms = 1.24 and 1.01 for high- and low-CFC subjects, respectively), high-CFC subjects generated more negative
thoughts about drilling (M = 4.10) than did low-CFC subjects
(M = 3.34). The CFC X Framing of Consequences X Type of
Thought interaction was not significant (p > .25).

Discussion
The results of this study support the validity of the CFC Scale
and support the viability of the CFC construct. High- and lowCFC subjects in this study read an essay describing both the
advantages and disadvantages of increased drilling. We predicted that, consistent with their greater concern for the environment, high-CFC subjects would respond less favorably than
low-CFC subjects toward the proposal of increased drilling.
Both subjects' attitudes and their thoughts in response to the
essay were consistent with this prediction. Not surprisingly, our
Southern Californian college-student subjects tended, as a rule,
to be against offshore drilling. However, high-CFC subjects reported more critical attitudes toward increased drilling than did
low-CFC subjects. Furthermore, their thought listings indicated
1

As recommended by Hull, Tedlie, and Lehn (1992), we entered two
covariates into our analysis of subjects' attitudes: concern about the environment and the interaction term of concern about the environment
and framing of consequences.
2
The appropriate follow-up to the multivariate test provided by the
MANOVA is to examine the canonical variate. We report the univariate
tests because they are more easily interpreted and because they are completely consistent with the canonical correlations. The correlations between the canonical variable and each of the dependent measures are as
follows: for unfavorable-favorable, r = —.30, for negative-positive, r =
- . 7 8 , and for bad-good, r = —.38.

748

STRATHMAN, GLEICHER, BONINGER, AND EDWARDS

that they counterargued more in response to the arguments in
favor of drilling.
The strongest test of the effect of CFC on subjects' responses
to the essay was provided by the interaction of CFC and the
framing of the advantages and disadvantages of offshore drilling. Low-CFC subjects, who care more about the immediate
implications of current actions, were more persuaded when the
advantages were presented as immediate and the disadvantages
as far off. In contrast, consistent with their tendency to focus on
the future implications of current actions, high-CFC subjects
were more convinced when the advantages were distant and the
disadvantages immediate.
Experiment 2
Our goal in Experiment 2 was to demonstrate the predictive
ability of CFC over and above the predictive ability of other related individual-differences measures. By demonstrating this
incremental validity, we can provide support for the idea that
CFC is a unique and important construct that is not redundant
with already established individual-differences measures.
Method
Subjects
Sixty students in introductory psychology courses at the University of
Missouri participated in exchange for extra course credit.

Procedure
All subjects received a booklet that contained questions concerning a
wide variety of attitudes and behaviors. Of importance to this study
were a series of questions regarding each individual's health-related behaviors and a series of questions regarding each individual's participation in environmentalism-related behaviors. These two topics were selected as dependent measures because we consider these topics to be
ideal examples of the type of domain in which CFC should exert a
strong influence.
Along with these dependent measures, subjects completed a series of
individual-differences measures that served as independent variables.
These scales were selected for use because they seemed to be the most
closely related to the CFC Scale and therefore provided the most stringent test of incremental validity.

gaged in. The seven behaviors were "recycle glass or plastic, recycle
newspaper, usefluorescentlight bulbs, walk or ride your bike instead of
driving a car, turn off lights whenever you leave a room, use a watersaving shower head, and drive a fuel-efficient car."3 Summing the number of items checked by each subject yielded the measure of environmentalism behavior.

Results
Relation of CFC to the Dependent Variables
Thefirststep in examining the predictive validity of the CFC
Scale was to compute Pearson product-moment correlations
between the CFC Scale and the health and environmentalism
measures. Scores on the CFC Scale were significantly related to
general concern for health, r(59) = .37, p < .01, and to number
of cigarettes smoked, r(59) = -.35, p < .01, and marginally
related to amount of alcohol consumed, r(59) = -.23, p < .09.
In addition, scores on the CFC Scale were significantly related
to extent of environmentalism behavior, r(59) = .38, p < .01.
Relation of CFC to Other Personality Measures
Mean scores on thefiveindividual-differences measures were
M = 42.5 (SD = 7.9) for the CFC Scale, M=69.l (SD = 10.2)
for the Conscientiousness dimension of the Big Five Personality
Inventory, M = 25.1 (SD = 2.6) for the Hope Scale, M = 28.8
(SD = 4.4) for the Life Orientation Scale, and M = 42.8 (SD =
6.5) for the Stanford Time Perspective Inventory.
As expected, the CFC Scale was related in varying degrees to
the personality measures included in the study. Scores on the
CFC Scale were significantly related to scores on the Big Five
Conscientiousness dimension, r(59) = .49, p < .01, the Life Orientation Test, r(59) = .33, p < .02, and the Stanford Time Perspective Inventory, r(59) = .36,/? < .01, and marginally related
to scores on the Hope Scale, r(59) = .23, p < . 10.
Incremental Validity of the CFC Scale

Given that we have learned that the CFC Scale is related to
the health- and environment-dependent variables and that the
CFC Scale is related to the other individual-differences measures, we next examined whether the CFC Scale can account
for a significant amount of unique variance over and above these
other personality measures. To do this, we constructed four
Measures
pairs of regression equations. In the first regression equation in
each pair, one of the related personality measures was regressed
Independent variables. In addition to the CFC Scale, subjects completed the Stanford Time Perspective Inventory (Zimbardo, 1990), the
on each of the dependent variables. In the second equation in
Hope Scale (Snyder et al., 1991), the Life Orientation Test (LOT, which
the pair, CFC was added as a second variable in the model.
is a measure of dispositional optimism-pessimism; Scheier & Carver,
Then, by computing the increase in amount of variance ac1985), and the Conscientiousness dimension of the Big Five Personality
counted for (increase in R2) by the second model over the first
Inventory (Goldberg, 1992).
model, we can determine whether CFC accounts for a unique
Dependent variables. To assess health-related behavior, we asked subportion
of the variance in the dependent variable. The signifijects about their general health beliefs and about specific health behavcance of the increase in R2 can be evaluated by computing an F
iors. Subjects rated how concerned they were, in general, about their
statistic by hand (Table 3; see Cohen & Cohen, 1983).
health (5-point scale anchored by not at all and extremely). Next, the
specific health behavior questions asked subjects to indicate how many
times they had consumed alcohol in the past month and to indicate how
many cigarettes they smoke on a weekly basis.
To assess subjects' participation in environmentalism-related behavior, we presented them with a list of seven environmentalism behaviors
and asked them to indicate which of the behaviors they regularly en-

3

Only two subjects reported using a water-saving shower head, and
only four subjects reported using fluorescent light bulbs. Therefore, these items were not included in the measure of environmental
behavior.

749

FUTURE CONSEQUENCES

Table 3
Hierarchical Multiple Regression Analysis Examining Increase
in Variance Accountedfor by CFC Term
Individual-differences measure
Dependent variable

Conscientiousness

Hope

Life
Orientation Test

Stanford Time
Perspective Inventory

4.52**
.135
.044

7.18***
.121
.095

7.41***
.106
.101

7.10***
.107
.096

7.36***
.112
.110

6.40**
.132
.093

6.67***
.109
.100

10.71***
.165
.155

.654
.045
.002

4.29**
.053
.052

3.03*
.029
.027

.595
.134
.006

2.83*
.129
.028

10.02***
.136
.134

10.51***
.134
.127

5.23**
.100
.067

Environmental behavior
F
r2
Ar2

Health concern
F

r2

Ar2

Alcohol use
F
r2
Ar2

Cigarette use
F

r2

Ar2

Note. Top number is the F value for the increase in variance explained. Middle number is amount of
variance explained by the full model. Bottom number is increase in explained variance due to the CFC
term. Degrees of freedom for all comparisons are 1, 56. CFC = consideration of future consequences.
*p<.10. **p<.05. ***p<.0l.

CFC served as a significant predictor of unique variance compared with the Hope Scale and was a marginally significant predictor over the LOT. However, the CFC Scale did not predict a
significant amount of variance over and above the Conscientiousness dimension or the Stanford Time Perspective Inventory for the alcohol use measure.
If we reverse the terms in the regression equations described
above, and therefore examine the influence of each of the competing individual-differences measures over and above the effect
of the CFC Scale, the pattern of results changes dramatically.
Recall that CFC explained a significant or marginally significant amount of unique variance over and above the other measures in 14 of the 16 comparisons. When the terms are reversed,
however, only one of the 16 comparisons is significant. That is,

As can be seen in Tables 3 and 4, there is strong support for
the ability of the CFC Scale to account for variance in health
and environmental behavior over and above the four competing
individual-differences measures. On the measures of environmental behavior, CFC predicts a significant amount of unique
variance over each of the four related individual-differences
scales. Similarly, CFC predicts a significant amount of unique
variance over each of the other scales for the measure of general
health concern. On the measure of cigarette use, CFC serves as
a significant predictor of unique variance over that accounted
for by the Hope Scale, the LOT, and the Stanford Time Perspective Inventory, and CFC was a marginally significant predictor
of unique variance over the Conscientiousness dimension of the
Big Five Personality Inventory. On the measure of alcohol use,

Table 4
Standardized Regression Weights Associated With CFC Term in Regression Analyses
Examining Increase in Variance Accountedfor by CFC
Individual-differences measure
Dependent variable

Conscientiousness

Hope

Life
Orientation Test

Stanford Time
Perspective Inventory

Environmental behavior
Health concern
Alcohol use
Cigarette use

.286**
.408***
-.112
-.236*

.339***
.335**
-.272**
-.397***

.358***
.357***
-.240*
-.420***

.355***
.463***
-.102
-.306**

Note. CFC = consideration of future consequences.
*/><.10. **/><.05. ***/?<.01.

750

STRATHMAN, GLEICHER, BONINGER, AND EDWARDS

only the Stanford Time Perspective Inventory ever accounts for
a significant amount of variance over and above that accounted
for by the CFC Scale, and this only for the alcohol use measure.
Discussion
Our purpose in this study was to examine the ability of the
CFC Scale to account for unique variance over and above a
number of related individual-differences measures. By doing so,
we have established that the CFC construct is not simply redundant with already established measures. Rather, there is substantial variance in behavior that can be explained by the CFC
construct, and not by other measures.
The CFC Scale was not a perfect predictor of unique variance, however. Most notably, the CFC Scale did not seem to be
a very good predictor of unique variance in alcohol use. There
are a number of plausible explanations for this weak effect. One
such explanation centers on the unclear relationship between
present drinking behavior and health problems later in life.
Whereas the relationship between smoking cigarettes now and
developing lung cancer later in life is relatively well-known, the
same type of relationship for drinking is not as clear-cut. Many
people believe that if they drink excessively only once or twice a
week, they are not doing long-term harm to their body. Indeed,
some research indicates that moderate alcohol use does not put
one at risk for health complications later in life. The CFC Scale,
not surprisingly, may simply be a better predictor of behavior
when the relationship between present behavior and future implications is very clear.
General Discussion
The goal of the present research was to examine a consequential individual-differences construct, CFC. First, we developed
and validated a measure of the extent to which individuals consider future consequences in making decisions about their current behaviors. Data collected during four academic terms at
three universities indicated that the CFC Scale has acceptable
reliability and validity. In addition, administration of the CFC
Scale to a known group (i.e., college activists) further attested to
the scale's validity.
Next, we demonstrated several important psychological consequences of individual differences in CFC. In Experiment 1,
CFC moderated the impact of persuasive messages: Individuals
high in CFC were more persuaded about the benefits of offshore
oil drilling by arguments that focused on the future advantages
of drilling, whereas individuals low in CFC were more persuaded by arguments that focused on the immediate disadvantages of drilling. Because prior research on the impact of CFC
has been conducted in domains quite different from persuasion
(Boninger et al., 1993, demonstrated the effects of CFC in the
context of counterfactual thinking), Experiment 1 is significant
in its demonstration of CFC's scope of influence.
Finally, in Experiment 2, we provided evidence for the unique
contribution of CFC over and above other related measures.
CFC significantly predicted several environmental and health
behaviors, consistently predicting unique variance over the
Stanford Time Perspective Inventory, the Hope Scale, the Life
Orientation Test, and the Conscientiousness dimen^on of the

Big Five Personality Inventory. Health and the environment
provide outstanding examples of domains in which individuals
engage in an intrapersonal struggle over behaviors with immediate and distant consequences. As we mentioned earlier, medical advances have taught us that many of the health problems
of our era result from lifestyle-related causes. The development
of these illnesses (e.g., heart disease, AIDS, and some forms of
cancer) is a relatively distant consequence of volitional behaviors.
A number of researchers (Bandura, 1986; Hochbaum, 1958;
Rosenstock, 1966) have proposed that the practice of preventive
health behaviors (i.e., those behaviors that would prevent the
development of lifestyle-related illnesses) is a function of five
beliefs: general health values, severity of threat posed by the illness, belief about personal vulnerability, belief that a particular
action will reduce the threat, and belief about the barriers to
performing a particular health behavior. It seems reasonable to
expect that the extent to which one considers future consequences could influence a number of these beliefs. For instance,
one factor that might influence beliefs about personal vulnerability is the extent to which an individual can imagine negative
occurrences in the distant future. To the extent that someone
generally considers future consequences, she or he might feel
more vulnerable to a specific disorder. However, a general tendency to disregard future consequences may prevent the individual from feeling particularly vulnerable. In fact, it may even
prevent the person from perceiving that a significant health
threat exists.
Future research might profitably focus on examining more
fundamental questions concerning the consideration of future
consequences. One very basic question is "What leads to the
development of concern for future consequences?" Our research has indicated that, at least by the time they reach college,
some individuals have developed a concern for distant events
and others have not. A factor in the development of this concern
might be whether the individual has experienced a major consequence of some much earlier behavior. This could occur
through life experience or learning. For instance, a parent may
develop a lifestyle-related health problem, or a parent may be
involved in some form of activism, therefore modeling concern
for future consequences.
Consideration of future consequences may well be a changeable construct. We believe that although the individual difference is relatively stable over time, individuals might experience
events that influence the extent to which they consider future
consequences. For instance, individuals who experience a dramatic increase in socioeconomic status may develop the "luxury" of thinking ahead, rather than being solely concerned with
immediate issues such as having enough food. Future research
might address factors that contribute to the ways in which individuals become more or less concerned with future consequences.
There is much to be learned about the process by which highand low-CFC individuals decide about their current behavior.
Do individuals low in CFC consider the immediate and distant
consequences of their behavior and then decide in favor of the
immediate consequences? Boninger and his colleagues' (1993)
data provide support for this hypothesized process, in that lowCFC subjects who were forced through a focus manipulation to

FUTURE CONSEQUENCES

751

Goldberg, L. R. (1992). The development of markers for the Big-Five
factor structure. Psychological Assessment, 4, 26-42.
Gonzalez, A., & Zimbardo, P. G. (1985). Time in perspective: A Psychology Today survey report. Psychology Today, 19, 21-26.
Hochbaum, G. (1958). Public participation in medical screening programs (DHEW Publication No. 572, Public Health Service). Washington, DC: Government Printing Office.
Hull, J. G., Tedlie, J. C, & Lehn, D. A. (1992). Moderator variables in
personality research: The problem of controlling for plausible alternatives. Personality and Social Psychology Bulletin, 18, 115-117.
Joreskog, K. G., & Sorbom, D. (1990). LISREL VII. Chicago: Statistical Package for the Social Sciences.
Kahneman, D., & Miller, D. T. (1986). Norm theory: Comparing reality
to its alternatives. Psychological Review, 93, 136-153.
Kastenbaum, R. (1961). The dimensions of future time perspective: An
experimental analysis. Journal ofGeneral Psychology, 65, 203-218.
Klineberg, S. L. (1968). Future time perspective and the preference for
delayed reward. Journal ofPersonality and Social Psychology, 8, 253257.
Lamm, H., Schmidt, R. W., & Trommsdorff, G. (1976). Sex and social
class as determinants of future orientation in adolescents. Journal of
Conclusion
Personality and Social Psychology, 34, 314-326.
LeShan, L. L. (1952). Time orientation and social class. Journal of AbIn this article, we have identified a new individual-differences
normal and Social Psychology, 47, 589-592.
construct and have presented a measure of this individual
Lessing,
E. E. (1968). Demographic, developmental, and personality
difference. In doing so, we have attempted to point out why
correlates of length of future time perspective. Journal ofPersonality,
differences in the extent to which individuals consider future
36, 193-201.
consequences may be important. We have demonstrated the imLessing, E. E. (1972). Extension of personal future time perspective,
pact of CFC and have identified areas of research in which the
age, and life satisfaction of children and adolescents. Developmental
consideration of future consequences may be consequential,
Psychology, 6, 457-468.
and thus, better inform theory development. We also have idenLoehlin, J. C. (1992). Latent variable models: An introduction to factor,
tified some practical implications of CFC. We believe there is
path, and structural analysis. Hillsdale, NJ: Erlbaum.
the potential for a great deal of future research, and we hope
Markman, K. D., Gavanski, I., Sherman, S. J., & McMullen, M. N.
that this research will be pursued from basic and applied per(1993). The mental simulation of better and worse possible worlds.
spectives.
Journal ofExperimental Social Psychology, 29, 87-109.
Mischel, W. (1958). Preference for delayed reinforcement: An experimental study of a cultural observation. Journal ofAbnormal and SoReferences
cial Psychology, 56, 57-61.
Bandura, A. (1986). Self-efficacy mechanism in psychological activation Nurmi, J.-E. (1987). Age, sex, social class, and quality of family interacand health-promoting behavior. In J. Madden IV, S. Matthysse, & J.
tions as determinants of adolescents' future orientation: A developBarchas (Eds.), Adaptation, learning and affect (pp. 124-146). New
mental task interpretation. Adolescence, 22, 977-991.
York: Raven Press.
Nuttin, J. (1964). The future time perspective in human motivation and
Barndt, R. J., & Johnson, D. M. (1955). Time orientation in delinlearning. Ada Psychologica, 23, 60-82.
quents. Journal ofAbnormal and Social Psychology, 51, 343-345.
Nuttin, J. (1985). Future time perspective and motivation. Hillsdale, NJ:
Boninger, D. S., Gleicher, F., & Strathman, A. (1993). Counterfactual
Erlbaum.
thinking: From what might have been to what may be. Manuscript Nuttin, J., & Lens, W. (1985). Future time perspective and motivation:
submitted for publication.
Theory and research method. Hillsdale, NJ: Erlbaum.
Brock, X C , & Del Giudice, C. (1963). Stealing and temporal orientaPlatt, J. J., & Eisenman, R. (1968). Internal-external control of reintion. Journal of Abnormal and Social Psychology, 66, 91-94.
forcement, time perspective, adjustment, and anxiety. Journal ofGenBurt, R. S. (1973). Confirmatory factor-analytic structures and the theeral Psychology, 79, 121-128.
ory construction process. Sociological Methods and Research, 2,
Ray, J. J., & Najman, J. M. (1986). The generalizability of deferment of
131-190.
gratification. Journal of Social Psychology, 126, 117-119.
Cohen, J., & Cohen, P. (1983). Applied multiple regression/ correlation
Rosenstock, I. M. (1966). Why people use health services. Millbank
analysis for the behavioral sciences. Hillsdale, NJ: Erlbaum.
Memorial Fund Quarterly, 44, 94.
deVoider, M. (1979). Time orientation, a review. Psychologica Belgica,
Rotter, J. B. (1966). Generalized expectancies for internal versus exter79,61-79.
nal control of reinforcement. Psychological Monographs, 80, 1-28
deVoider, M., & Lens, W. (1982). Academic achievement and future
(Whole No. 609).
time perspective as a cognitive-motivational concept. Journal ofPerRotter, J. B., Chance, J. E., & Phares, E. J. (1972). Applications of a
sonality and Social Psychology, 42, 566-571.
social learning theory of personality. New \fork: Holt, Rinehart &
Fraisse, P. (1963). The psychology of time. Westport, CT: Greenwood
Winston.
Press.
Franklin, R. D. (1963). Youth's expectancies about internal versus ex- Rotter, J. B., & Mulry, R. C. (1965). Internal versus external control of
ternal control of reinforcement related to N variables. Unpublished
reinforcement and decision time. Journal of Personality and Social
doctoral dissertation, Purdue University.
Psychology, 2, 598-604.

think about the future did not seem to weigh the future greatly.
Thinking about future possibilities did not ameliorate their
negative affect, as it did for high-CFC subjects. In some cases,
however, low-CFC individuals may fail even to consider distant
consequences. This may occur for individuals who are extremely low in CFC, or when the future consequences seem particularly unclear or ambiguous. It is possible that high-CFC individuals are more likely to generate and consider possible future outcomes even when future consequences are ambiguous,
whereas low-CFC individuals are less able or inclined to do so.
A related issue is the generally greater abstractness of future
as opposed to immediate consequences of behavior. It may be
that low-CFC individuals are simply less able or willing to
contemplate abstract future outcomes than are high-CFC individuals. Thus, future research can examine the process by
which high- and low-CFC individuals decide about their current
behavior and the role that temporal distance and degree of abstractness play in that process.

752

STRATHMAN, GLEICHER, BONINGER, AND EDWARDS

Sanders, S. (1986). The dimensions of subjective time experience. Unpublished doctoral dissertation, University of Washington, Seattle.
Scheier, M. F., & Carver, C. S. (1985). Optimism, coping, and health:
Assessment and implications of generalized outcome expectancies.
Health Psychology, 4, 219-247.
Snyder, C. R., Harris, C, Anderson, J. R., Holleran, S. A., Irving, L. M.,
Sigmon, S. X, Yoshinobu, L., Gibb, J., Langelle, C, & Harney, P.
(1991). The will and the ways: Development and validation of an individual-differences measure of hope. Journal ofPersonality and Social Psychology, 60, 570-585.
Stewart, R. A. C. (1976). An experimental form of the Stewart personality inventory: A simplified-format measure of major personality dimensions. Perceptual and Motor Skills, 43, 813-814.
Stewart, R. A. C, & Ahmed, S. M. S. (1984). Factor analysis of the
Stewart personality inventory research form and its correlations with
some other personality instruments. Social Behavior and Personality,
12, 143-151.
Teahan, J. E. (1958). Future time perspective, optimism, and academic

achievement. Journal ofAbnormal and Social Psychology, 57, 379380.
Wallace, M. (1956). Future time perspective in schizophrenia. Journal
ofAbnormal and Social Psychology, 52, 240-245.
Wallace, M., & Rabin, A. I. (1960). Temporal experience. Psychological
Bulletin, 57,213-236.
Wells, G. L., & Gavanski, I. (1989). Mental simulation of causality.
Journal ofPersonality and Social Psychology, 56, 161-169.
Wheaton, B., Muthen, B., Alwin, D. E, & Summers, G. F. (1977). Assessing reliability and stability in panel models. In D. R. Heise (Ed.),
Sociological methodology 1977 (pp. 84-136). San Francisco: JosseyBass.
Zaleski, Z. (1992, July). Towards psychology of personal future. In E.
KJinger (Chair), Time perspective, goals and motivation. Symposium
conducted at the 25th meeting of the International Congress of Psychology, Brussels.
Zimbardo, P. G. (1990). The Stanford Time Perspective Inventory Stanford, CA: Stanford University.

Appendix
Consideration of Future Consequences Scale
For each of the statements below, please indicate whether or not the statement is characteristic of you. If the statement is extremely uncharacteristic of you (not at all like you) please write a " 1 " to the left of the question; if the
statement is extremely characteristic of you (very much like you) please write a " 5 " next to the question. And, of
course, use the numbers in the middle if you fall between the extremes. Please keep the following scale in mind as you
rate each of the statements below.

extremely
uncharacteristic

2
somewhat
uncharacteristic

uncertain

somewhat
characteristic

extremely
characteristic

_ 1. I consider how things might be in the future, and try to influence those things with my day to day behavior.
_2. Often I engage in a particular behavior in order to achieve outcomes that may not result for many years.
_3. I only act to satisfy immediate concerns,figuringthe future will take care of itself.
_4. My behavior is only influenced by the immediate (i.e., a matter of days or weeks) outcomes of my actions.
_5. My convenience is a big factor in the decisions I make or the actions I take.
_6. I am willing to sacrifice my immediate happiness or well-being in order to achieve future outcomes.
_7. I think it is important to take warnings about negative outcomes seriously even if the negative outcome
will not occur for many years.
_8. I think it is more important to perform a behavior with important distant consequences than a behavior
with less-important immediate consequences.
_9- I generally ignore warnings about possible future problems because I think the problems will be resolved
before they reach crisis level.
_ 10. I think that sacrificing now is usually unnecessary since future outcomes can be dealt with at a later time.
_11. I only act to satisfy immediate concerns,figuringthat I will take care of future problems that may occur
at a later date.
_12. Since my day to day work has specific outcomes, it is more important to me than behavior that has
distant outcomes.

Received December 30, 1992
Revision received October 12, 1993
Accepted November 9, 1993 »

